NASICON-type NaTi2(PO4)3 (NTP) has gained enormous attraction as a anode material for sodium-ion batteries (SIBs), thanks to their open 3D framework and excellent electrochemical performance. Nevertheless, low electrical conductivity, agglomeration, and dissolvation of Ti ion in electrolyte seriously impair the rate and cycling performance of NTP. Here, monodispersed sphere or rugby-shaped NTP nanoparticles with an average size of about 100 nm are synthesized by solvothermal method, then graphene is uniformly coated on the nanoparticles using a fluidized bed plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition (FB-PECVD). Sodium-ion semi-battery based on NTP@Gr nanocomposite shows high-rate reversible capability (132 mAhg-1@0.5C, 115.1 mAhg-1@1C, 109.3 mAhg-1@2C, 100.7 mAhg-1@5C, 95.9 mAhg-1@10C, 67.2 mAhg-1@20C, 53.9 mAhg-1@50C), high initial coulombic efficiency (93%), and long–term capacity retention of 83.8% after 1000 cycles at 10C , mainly attributed to its conformal graphene coating and graphene branches. This novel nanostructure provides a promising pathway for developing high performance NASICON-type electrode materials for sodium storage. 
Due to the rapid consumption of fossil fuels, environmental issues, and the huge demands for electronics, electric vehicles and renewable power stations, it is urgent to develop energy storage technologies with fast charging, low cost, good durability, high capacity, and safety.1, 2 Although lithium-ion batteries (LIB) have made great progress and have been widely used for more than 20 years, it is plagued by high costs, shortage of lithium resources, and limited energy density.3, 4 Given the abundant sodium resources, low cost, and battery chemistry similar to LIB rechargeable sodium-ion batteries (SIB) are considered to be the most competitive alternatives to LIB.1, 5-7 However, the large sodium ion radius and the serious volume expansion of the electrode material during charge/discharge often make the sodium storage performance (cycle life, rate capability) of SIBs inferior to LIBs.2, 8, 9 Therefore, finding the appropriate electrode materials to improve the rate performance and cycle life of SIB is the key to its energy storage application.NaTi2(PO4)3 [NTP], as a sodium super ionic conductor (NASICON) material, has an open 3D framework with large interstitial spaces, high sodium ion conductivity, high theoretical capacity (133 mAh·g-1), low cost, and controllable easy synthesis.10-15 However, the inherently poor electronic conductivity of the phosphate backbone severely limits its rate performance and cycle performance as a high-performance SIB electrode material. 16, 17 Several strategies to overcome these challenges have proposed, such as nanostructuring, doping, and constructing conductive composite networks via carbon coating. 10, 18-22 Amorphous carbon coating on NTP nanoparticles is the most widely used method to increase the electronic conductivity of composite electrodes.23-25 Carbon nanotubes (CNTs) were also introduced into carbon-coated NTP composite electrodes to improve electronic conductivity and mechanical properties.26 With the rise of electrospinning technology, NTP/C composite nanofibers show better electronic and ionic conductivities, which is due to the shortening of the electronic/ionic transport paths in the 1-D porous nanostructures of NTP-nanofibers (NFs) and 3D crosslinked carbon nanofibers.27, 28 Emerging graphene has opened up a new method to improve NTP electrodes by establishing a 3D conductive network, and great efforts have been made to achieve effective coverage of uniform graphene on the NTP nanomaterials.18, 29 Most studies have effectively improved sodium storage performance (rate performance and cycle life) by assembling 2D/3D NTP@reduced graphene oxide (NTP@rGO) composite electrodes. 30-32 However, no matter the amorphous carbon, CNT, or rGO coatings, particle agglomeration and uneven coating are difficult to address.23, 26, 33, 34 Especially for the NTP@rGO composite materials, dissolution of Ti ions into electrolyte caused by incomplete coating will seriously deteriorate the cycle stability of the composite electrode.35 Therefore, it is of great interest to develop a high-quality, complete, uniform, and controllable (thickness and doped) graphene coating method.Here, we demonstrate an in-situ graphene growth on the surface of NTP nanoparticles by a fluidized bed plasma enhanced chemical vapor deposition (FB-PECVD) technique. Monodisperse NTP nanoparticles with regular morphology and uniform size distribution are covered by graphene uniformly and completely. The as obtained NTP@graphene (NTP@Gr) structure not only prevents the NTP particles from directly contacting the electrolyte, preventing Ti ions from dissolving into the electrolyte, but also avoids agglomeration and shortens the diffusion path of sodium ions and electrons, which will help improve the ion conductivity and sodium storage performance. In addition, the branched graphene protruding from the NTP@Gr further promotes electron transport between particles and electrodes. Based on a half-cell electrochemical test, the NTP@Gr electrode shows significant improvements in specific capacity, rate performance, and long-term cycling performance. Besides, NVP@C//NTP@Gr sodium ion full battery (SIFB) is also assemblied and evaluated simply.
NTP nanoparticles were synthesized by a solvothermal method. Typically, 2 mmol CH3COONa and 2 mmol titanium (IV) butoxide were first dissolved in 3 mL of phosphorous acid solution (85 wt %) and 60 mL of ethanol solvent, respectively. The two solutions were then mixed by magnetic stirring for 10 mins, then transferred into a Teflon vessel (100 mL) for a solvothermal reaction. The autoclave was placed in an oven and reacted at 160 °C for 3 h. White wet products are available by centrifugation separation and washing by deionized water for three times. After drying in vacuum oven at 60 °C for two days, white amorphous NTP nanoparticles were obtained finally.NTP@Gr nanocomposites were prepared by FB-PECVD and subsequent heat treatment. The method of FB-PECVD was described elsewhere.36  Briefly, 1.5 g NTP nanoparticles was placed inside a quartz fluidized bed reactor. The reactor was pumped down to 30 mTorr, and 50 standard cubic centimetres per minute (sccm) of argon was flowed upward into the reactor to make the NTP powder fluidized. Microwave radiation generated by a magnetron was coupled to the reactor through a rectangular waveguide microwave. The power of the microwave was ramped up to 800 W, corresponding to a temperature about 600°C tested by infrared thermometer. After a stable glow was established in the reactor, additional methane (10 sccm) and hydrogen (20 sccm) were introduced in. The gaseous precursors were dissociated in the plasma and carbon were grown in-situ onto the NTP particles. The reaction was performed for 30 min to ensure completed coverage of graphene on the NTP nanoparticles. Once the desired graphene coating was formed, methane, hydrogen, and microwave were shut down in sequence. The reactor was cooled down to room temperature in the protection of argon flow. The as-obtained NTP@Gr nanocomposites can be further annealed at 600 °C for 2 h in argon. Besides, a control pristine NTP sample was prepared by The morphology and microstructure of all samples were investigated by high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HR-TEM, Hitachi HT7700, 120 kV) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM, Hitachi S-4800). X-ray diffraction (XRD, Bruker D8 Advance) was recorded by using Cu Kα radiation. Inductively Coupled Plasma Atomic Emission Spectrometer (ICP-AES) was tested by Leeman Labs Prodigy ICP-OES. Raman spectroscopy and thermogravimetry analysis (TGA) were carried out with EZRaman-M Portable Raman System (EZM-785-A2, λ=532 nm) and PerkinElmer STA 8000 Thermal Analyser (heating rate 10°C/min), respectively. Electrochemical measurementsThe electrochemical performance of NTP@Gr and pristine NTP electrode materials was carried out by the 2016-type coin-cell with a metallic sodium film as the counter electrode. The working electrodes were made by casting slurry containing active material, carbon black, and PVDF with a mass ration (8:1:1) on a Al foil. Note that all the capacity values for the NTP@Gr electrodes were calculated based on the mass of NTP, which was 76% of the whole electrodes including NTP, graphene, carbon black, and PVDF. The electrodes were dried at 90 °C for 12 h in air drying oven and 110 °C for 6 h in vacuum drying oven, and then assembled into the coin cells in a argon-filled glovebox with moisture of <0.1 ppm and oxygen of <0.1 ppm. The diameter of working electrode was 16 mm with a thickness of about 20 μm, and the mass loading of active materials was about 1.5 mg/cm2. The electrodes were separated by a glass fiber (Whatman GF/A), and the electrolyte was composed of 1 M NaClO4 in the ethylene carbonate/diethyl carbonate (1:1 v/v). The galvanostatic charge/discharge tests were performed on a battery system (LANHE CT2001A) within a cutoff voltage range from 1.5 to 3 V. The specific capacity was calculated based on the mass of active materials. Cyclic voltammetry (CV) and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) were carried out by the CHI660E electrochemical workstation (Shanghai Chenhua instrument company, China). The scan rate of CV curves was 1mV/s, and EIS was investigated by applying a sine wave with amplitude of 5 mV over the frequency range from 100 kHz to 0.01 Hz.
Fig. 1A-C show the TEM and SEM images of NTP nanoparticles synthesized by the solvothermal method. Monodisperse NTP nanoparticles present a porous sphere or rugby shape with an average size of about 100 nm, which is proved to be amorphous by XRD (Fig.2A). After coating graphene by FB-PECVD, the NTP@Gr nanocomposites show weak agglomeration and slightly increased size, while the morphology remains essentially unchanged (Fig.1D). Besides, it is evident that many small grains smaller than 5 nm decorated on the NTP nanoparticles and forming a pitaya-shaped structure. These NTP@Gr nanocomposites have pronounced XRD peaks (Fig.2A) perfectly matching the standard diffraction peaks of NTP crystals, indicating pure NTP phase. The crystallization of the NTP is the result of the heating effect of microwave, while the smaller grain size is mainly due to the short heating period. The most important feature is the uniform graphene coating on the NTP nanoparticles with interlayer spacing of 0.37nm (Fig. 1F). Moreover, branched graphene protruding from the NTP@Gr nanoparticles is also observed with interlayer spacing of 0.36 ~ 0.37 nm (Fig. 1G). The graphitic nature of the graphene coating and branched graphene are confirmed by Raman spectroscopy (Fig. 2B). Two pronounced D and G bands at around 1335 and 1603 cm-1, respectively, with intensity ratio (ID/IG) of 0.508, indicates well ordered sp2 carbon structure. The electronic conductivity of NTP@Gr nanocomposite can be greatly improved by the graphene coating. The content of graphene in the nanocomposite is about 4.7 wt. % as calculated by the TGA (the inset of Fig. 2B). After the thermal annealing, the morphology, particles size of NTP@Gr nanocomposites are maintained (Fig. 1H and L), and the branched graphene is preserved as well (Fig.1 I, K and M). The thermal annealing improved the crystallinity of mesoporous NTP nanoparticles, as being reflected by HRTEM (Fig. 1J) and XRD (Fig. 2A). Besides, the intensity rate of D peak to G peak (ID/IG) increase to 0.9 after annealing treatment while the peak position remains constant (Fig.2B), illustrating that the defects of graphene on the surface of NTP nanocrystals increase visibly. This phenomenon may be caused by the oxidation of graphene by oxygen generateed by recrystallization of amorphous NTP or residual oxygen in the vacuum furnace. The preparation of NTP@Gr nanocomposite is illustrated in Scheme 1. Briefly, amorphous NTP nanoparticles obtained by solvothermal synthesis were processed by FB-PECVD. Carbonaceous precursor, i.e. CH4, was dissociated by the energetic electrons in the plasma. The resulting carbon radicals (CHx, x < 4) was transported to the surface of NTP nanoparticles and led to graphene growth. Thanks to the efficient thermal and mass transport in the fluidized bed, graphene can be uniformly grown on all of the particles.37, 38 The plasma enables the growth of graphene at a relatively low temperature and in a short period. Thus, a post annealing was conducted to improve the crystallinity of the NTP. Notably, the branched graphene on the NTP@Gr nanocomposite could favor the electrical contact.The electrochemical behavior of NTP@Gr nanocomposite and pristine NTP nanoparticles is evaluated in CR2016 type coin cells. Fig. 4A and B show the galvanostatic charge/discharge curves of NTP@Gr nanocomposite and pristine NTP nanoparticles at various current rates from 0.5 to 50C in voltage window between 1.5 and 3 V. It’s worth noting that the initial discharge and charge specific capacities of NTP@Gr nanocomposite are 132 and 123 mAhg-1 at 0.5C, respectively, with a coulombic efficiency (CE) of 93%, which is much higher than the performances of pristine NTP nanoparticles (128 mAhg-1, 107 mAhg-1, and 83.6%), hard carbon, disordered carbon,39 metal alloy.40 Considering that the capacity contribution from graphene for NTP@Gr electrode is almost negligible,11 the capacity of the nanocomposite electrode can be completely attributed to the NTP nanoparticles.The NTP@Gr nanocomposite electrode has a symmetrical profile and flat discharge and charge platform at 1C, similar to the reported studies,10, 25 and a smaller discharge-charge polarization of about 78 mV than the pristine NTP (138 mV) and reported NTP nanoparticles.41 Higher CE and lower polarization is probably because high ionic/electron conductively. Compared with the pristine NTP nanoparticles, higher discharge voltage and flatter voltage plateaus can be observed for the NTP@Gr nanocomposite, which is a sign of lower equivalent serial resistance. EIS of the electrodes are compared in Fig. 4C. The high frequency intercept at the real axis (Z'), diameter of the semicircle in the middle frequency range, and the straight line with a slope of nearly 45° at the low frequency refer to equivalent serial resistance (Rs), charge transfer resistance (Rct), and Warburg impedance (Zw), respectively. These three parameters represent the resistance of the electrolyte, the charge transfer resistance, and the diffusion impedance of sodium ion into the porous electrode, respectively.42 The parameters were obtained by fitting the data, using an equivalent circuit plotted in Fig. 4C, using the ZSimplWin software. The Rs are almost same for the NTP@Gr nanocomposite (8.4 ohm) and the pristine NTP (9 ohm).  A much smaller Rct (184.6 ohm) of the NTP@Gr than that of pristine NTP (1011 ohm) indicates a faster charge transfer kinetics. A smaller Zw (24 ohm) than that of pristine NTP (170 ohm) suggests a faster Na+ diffusion for the NTP/Gr electrode. All of these results are consistent with the reported Na+ diffusion coefficient calculated by Randles-Sevchik equation.43 The rate performances of the NTP@Gr nanocomposite and the pristine NTP are compared in Fig.4D. Markedly, NTP@Gr nanocomposite has an absolute advantage at all rates. The difference in the specific capacity at the same rate gradually increases with increasing the C rate from 0.5 to 10C, which indicates that NTP@Gr nanocomposite can charge and discharge blisteringly, thereby providing higher energy and power density. Moreover, the specific capacity of NTP@Gr nanocomposite electrode can be almost restored to the original value as the current rate returns to 1C after high-rate cycling, which further demonstrating the cycling stability and structure integrity of electrodes.Fig. 5A shows the CV curves of the NTP@Gr nanocomposite electrodes at a scanning rate of 1 mV/s within a potential window of 0~3 V (vs Na/Na+). A pair of well-defined redox peaks appeared at 2.32/1.97 V for the NTP@Gr nanocomposite, which characterizes the redox reactions of Ti3+↔Ti4+ through a two-phase reaction mechanism.1 What’s more, the peak-to-peak spacing in the first 5 cycles is constantly about 350 mV, which is comparable to the reported value at the same scan rate,42 and indicates that the NTP@Gr nanocomposite has stable reversibility and good cyclic stability. The polarization remains constant with increasing the number of cycles at 1C (Fig. 5B), which is more stable than that of microsized carbon-coated NTP in literature,44 illustrating the importance of unirom graphene coating for the small and stable polarization of NTP nanoparticles. In addition, a platform capacity of up to about 103 mAhg-1 brings a high platform rate of 90.1% and remains unchanged for the first 10 cycles, which again proves excellent cycle stability of the NTP@Gr nanocomposite.
Long-term cycling performance is another key parameter for electrode materials in practical application. Fig. 5C shows the discharge-charge profiles of NTP@Gr nanocomposite at 10C for the 1st, 50th, 200th, 500th, and 1000th circle, and the corresponding discharge capacities are 95.7, 94.2, 89.9, 85.2, and 80.6 mAhg-1, respectively. The capacity retention rate relative to its initial capacity reaches 83.8% after 1000 cycles (Fig.5D), indicating an excellent cyclability. Besides, the CE of the NTP@Gr nanocomposite has been maintained above 99% throughout the whole cycles, as shown in Fig.5D, revealing extremely efficient use of sodium ions. The superior long-cycling of NTP@Gr nanocomposite under high rate is mainly attributed to the uniform and complete graphene coating. First of all, independent graphene coating of NTP nanoparticles can prevent the self-aggregation of NTP nanoparticles and improve the capacity utilization of active materials. By comparing the SEM images of NTP@Gr nanocomposite between unused and used electrode sheets, as shown in Fig.6A and C, few aggregation can be observed in the used NTP@Gr nanocomposite electrode sheet at 1C for 50 cycles supports above inference. At the same time, branched graphene enables cross-linking between NTP nanoparticles, thereby ensuring the effective electrical contact between graphene and NTP particles during cycling and resulting in the attractive long cycle-life. Secondly, compared with lithium ions, larger ions radius allows sodium ions to have lower desolvation energies from organic solvents and higher ion conductivity in NaClO4 solutions,45, 46 which are of great benefit to improve the kinetics of the insertion/extraction process and electrochemical performance at high current densities. Besides, identical ratio of P/Ti between unused and used NTP@Gr electrode sheet from the element mapping diagram and EDX spectrogram (Fig 6E and F) and Table 1 indicates that dissolution of Ti ions into electrolyte doesn’t exist in NTP@Gr nanocomposite, which is also beneficial for improving the cycle stability.35 Furthermore, the nanostructured NTP particles reduce the electron/ion transport path in the crystal, and the mesoporous structure inside NTP nanoparticles provide active sites for the embedding of sodium ions, these can ensure that NTP@Gr nanocomposite has excellent cycling performance at high rate.11 Taking the superior electrochemical of NTP@Gr nanocomposite into account, a NVP@C//NTP@Gr SIFB is fabricated using NVP@C prepared by sol-gel method 47 as cathode, NTP@Gr as anode, and 1M NaClO4 (in EC/DEC) as electrolyte. The mass ratio of cathode and anode is set to 1:1.15, and the battery performance is tested between 0.5 and 2.5 V, as shown in Fig.7D. During the charging/discharge processes at 0.5C, the SIFB shows an inclined discharge platform, and the capacity value of SIFB calculated based on the mass of NVP cathode material decrease from initial capacity of 67.5 mAh·g-1 to 41.4 mAh·g-1 after 7 cycles. The unsatisfactory result is mainly due to large size and poor carbon coating (Fig.7A), low crystallinity of NVP particles (Fig.7B) and the resulting low specific capacity of NVP@C electrode (Fig.7C).In summary, branched graphene is uniformly coated on solvothermally synthesized NTP nanoparticles by FB-PECVD method. The NTP@Gr nanocomposite exhibits high-rate reversible capability of 132, 115.1, 109.3, 100.7, 95.9, 67.2 and 53.9 mAhg-1 at 0.5C, 1C, 2C, 5C, 10C, 20C and 50C, respectively. A small discharge-charge polarization of about 78 mV and high initial CE (93%) at 0.5C are also obtained. What’s more, the sodium ion semi-battery has a retention of 83.8% (80.6 mAhg-1) after 1000 cycles at 10C, and with high CE above 99%. The outstanding rate performance and cycle stability can be attributed to the uniform graphene coating and isolation of the active particles from the electrolyte. Although the electrochemical performance of NVP@C//NTP@Gr SIFB isn‘t ideal, there remains much scope for improvement. To sum up, FB-PECVD may inspire a new method for graphene coating on active energy-storage materials.