Na3V2(PO4)3/C nanocomposites are synthesized by an oleic acid-basedsurfactant assisted method.

XRD patterns reveal high purity samples, while Ramanspectroscopy evidences the highly disordered character of the carbon phase.

Electronmicrographs show submicron agglomerates with a sea-urchin like morphologyconsisting of primary nanorods coated by a carbon phase.

The electrode material wastested in half and full sodium cells.

The electrochemical performance is clearlyimproved by this optimized morphology, particularly at high C rates.

 Thus, 76.6mA h g-1 was reached at 40 C for Na3V2(PO4)3/C nanorods.

 In addition, 105.3 and 96.7mA h g−1 are kept after 100 cycles at rates as high as 5 and 10C.

This exceptionalcoulombic efficiency can be ascribed to the good mechanical stability and the lowinternal impedance at the electrode-electrolyte interphase.

Sodium is an environmentally harmless element whose abundance allows a costeffective manufacturing of compounds.

It has contributed to envisage Na-ion batteriesas serious competitors of Li-ion counterparts as long as an increasingly demand oflithium may provoke a non-sustainable increase of prices.
Despite this fact, it iscommonly assumed that Na-ion batteries will deliver lower energy densities thanlithium ones due to the less-reducing potential.

Also, the large ionic radius of sodiummay hinder ion diffusion and provokes undesirable structural changes upon cycling.

These limitations led to a less intensive research several decades ago.

Notwithstanding,a renewed attention is being recently paid on the research on this kind of batteriesbatteries.
Particularly, the study of sodium containing phosphates with NASICONstructure has demonstrated that their rigid and open framework is highly suitable toensure the ionic conductivity for a long number of cycles.

This three-dimensionalframework is based on [V2(PO4)3]-repeating units consisting of VO6 octahedra and PO4tetrahedra, while Na+cations occupy six-fold and eight-fold vacancies, which ensure afast ionic diffusion.

The nature of the transition element introduced in the stoichiometry of thesecompounds is responsible for the eventual operating voltage of the sodium cell.

Thus,the presence of titanium in Li1-xNaxTi2(PO4)3 leads to a cell voltage close to 2.0 V.

16Anyway, these working voltages are still low for reaching high energy densities.

However, the use of vanadium boosts the operating voltage to values close to 3.5 V, atwhich the V4+/V3+ redox couple is active, thus favoring the design of sodium batterieswith acceptable energy densities.

Nevertheless, initial reports on this compositionrevealed moderated performances at high C rates.

This was probably due to the use ofsolid state preparative methods needing for high temperature and/or long annealingtime, which result in large particles hindering sodium ion diffusion and performing lowelectrical conductivities.
 Contrarily, we have recently reported that the sol-gelmethod is a valuable preparation route for preparing partially substituted Na3V2(PO4)3/Cwith optimal electrochemical behavior of as cathode for Na-ion batteries.

Similarlyother authors have proposed interesting approaches to prepare new morphologiescontributing exceptionally to a superior electrochemical performance at high C rates.

An oleic based surfactant assisted method has been used to prepareNa3V2(PO4)3/C with a nanorod-like morphology.

Their morphology and structurecharacterization was performed by electron microscopy and X-ray diffraction.

Theelectrochemical behavior was analysed in sodium half and full cells galvanostaticallycycled.

Also, the determination of the kinetic response by impedance spectroscopyallowed to unveil the optimized performance for a particular content of oleic acid.

