NaTi2(PO4)3/C porous plates have been successfully synthesized via solvothermal approach withammonia as inductive agent combined in-situ carbon coating.

It reveals that the inductive agent plays acritical role in morphology-controllable fabrication.

The morphology, structure, and electrochemicalproperties of NaTi2(PO4)3/C composites with multilayered plates, single-layered plate, porous multilayered plates all have been investigated, which are prepared by using urea, triethylamine, and ammonia,respectively.

Among these samples, NaTi2(PO4)3/C porous multilayered plates with ammonia additionexhibit the best electrochemical properties due to their unique mesoporous structure.

NaTi2(PO4)3/Cporous multilayered plates deliver an initial specific capacity of 125 and 110 mAh g1 at 0.1 and 1 C,respectively.

Furthermore, NaTi2(PO4)3/C porous multilayered plates show a good rate capability, whosecapacity and corresponding capacity retention reach 85 mAh g1 and 82.4%, respectively, after 120 cyclesunder the high rate of 10 C.

The excellent results indicate that the NaTi2(PO4)3/C porous multilayeredplates are a promising electrode candidate for sodium ion battery.

To date, with the rapid development of consumer electronics,exploring for suitable energy storage devices are extremelydemanded to keep up with the fast-paced life [1e5].

Recently, greatefforts of lithium ion batteries (LIBs) have been widely investigatedas renewable power source for various portable electronics, due totheir high-energy capacity, long-life and environmental friendlyproperties [6e8].

Nevertheless, it is inevitable that lithium supplieswill run out in one day since the tremendous requirement forlithium commodity chemicals but insufficient lithium reserves[9e12].

This obstacle has become a major limitation for practicalapplication of lithium ion battery in larger scale energy storage.

Therefore, great attention has been drawn to ambient temperaturesodium ion batteries, benefiting from the abundant and inexpensive sodium resources [13].

Naturally, considerable efforts havebeen paid to find suitable electrode materials for sodium ion batteries (SIBs).

As far as Na ions host cathode materials are concerned,oxides and phosphates have been extensively investigated, such aslayer transition metal oxides NaxCoO2 [14], NaCo0.5Mn0.5O2 [15],polyanion-type NaFePO4 [16], and NASICON-type Na3V2(PO4)3[17e19].

Furthermore, some titanium based anode materials withnegligible volume expansion are also highly desired, such as TiO2[20] and Na2Ti3O7 [21].

Within the polyanion category, NASICON-type NaTi2(PO4)3(NTP) as a typical super-ionic conductor has been considered as apromising alternative electrode material for SIBs, because of itshighly covalent three-dimensional framework crystalline structureand good behavior as ionic conductors.

Moreover, the NaTi2(PO4)3presents a well-defined redox plateau (~2.1 V vs.

Na/Naþ) with twoNa ions intercalation/deintercalation, delivering a theoretical specific capacity of 133 mAh g1 [22].

Though pioneering works inNaTi2(PO4)3 have opened a new window in the field of aqueousrechargeable sodium ion battery and non-aqueous sodium ionbattery, the low intrinsic electrical conductivity of NaTi2(PO4)3 stilllimits the specific capacity and rate capacity owning to the poorelectronic conductivity of phosphates [23e27].

In order to overcome this intractable problem, two typical strategies have beenwidely applied to enhance the ionic and electron transport kinetics.

On the one hand, reduce of the particles to a nanometer-sizeddimension, with decreasing the Na ions diffusion path andincreasing the contact area within the electrolyte [28e30]; On theother hand, form an effective conductive layer (e.g., carbon orgraphene) around the NaTi2(PO4)3 particles to improve the electronic conductivity [31e34].

Notably, nanometer-sized and porousstructures are conductive to the penetration of the electrolyte, thusshorting the transmission distance between ions and the solidphase.

Therefore, plentiful composites with porous plate structurehave also been successfully synthesized and applied in the field ofenergy storage [35e38].

 Encouragingly, some desirable electrochemical performances have been achieved.

In this work, we firstly report a facile solvothermal approach forsynthesizing three types of NaTi2(PO4)3/C microplates withdifferent submicro structures using ammonia, triethylamine, andurea as inductive agents, respectively.

Crystalline particles areuniformly coated by conductivity carbon layer.

Owning to theadvantage of pore structure and electronic conductive network, theNaTi2(PO4)3/C porous multilayered plate prepared via addingammonia presents the best electrochemical performance.

In conclusion, NaTi2(PO4)3/C composites with three differentmicroplate structures have been obtained through simply adjustingthe inductive agent with a facile solvothermal method.

The resultsindicate that the addition of inductive agent plays an important rolein crystal growth.

Among these composites, NaTi2(PO4)3/C porousmultilayered plates prepared by using ammonia as inductive agentpossess the highest BET surface areas and best electrochemicalperformance.

Amphorous carbon layer is uniformly coated on theporous plate structure, which could not only enhance the electronicconductivity of electrode but also beneficial to the Na ions diffusionduring cycling.

Ultimately, the NaTi2(PO4)3/C porous multilayeredplates delivers a remarkable initial discharge capacity of125 mAh g1 between 1.5 and 3.3 V at 0.1 C.

In addition, even at ahigh rate of 10 C, it shows a high specific capacity of 85 mAh g1 atthe first cycle and remains at 70 mAh g1 after 120 cycles.

Thisstudy suggests that NaTi2(PO4)3/C porous multilayered plates arepromising electrode material for sodium ion batteries.

Furthermore, the influences of inductive agent in this research may opennew avenue for morphology control of NaTi2(PO4)3 particles.

