Sintering processes yield a mutual diffusion region at the electrode/solid electrolyte interface, which isconsidered as a crucial problem for developing large-sized all-solid-state rechargeable lithium batterieswith high power density.

This work focuses on the interface between LiNi1/3Co1/3Mn1/3O2 (NMC) andNASICON-structured Liþ conductive glass ceramics solid electrolyte (Li2OeAl2O3eSiO2eP2O5eTiO2eGeO2: LATP sheet (AG-01)), and investigates the effects of sintering temperature on interfacial structureand interfacial resistance at the NMC/LATP sheet.

Thin films of NMC were fabricated on the LATP sheetsat 700 C or 900 C as a model system.

We found that the thickness of the mutual diffusion region wasalmost the same, ca.

30 nm, in these two samples, but the NMC film prepared at 900 C had three ordersof magnitude larger interfacial resistance than the NMC film prepared at 700 C.

Around the interfacebetween the NMC film prepared at 900 C and the LATP sheet, Co in the NMC accumulates as a reducedvalence and lithium-free impurity crystalline phase will be also formed.

These two problems mustcontribute to drastic increasing of interfacial resistance.

Formation of de-lithiated NMC around theinterface and its thermal instability at higher temperature may be considerable reason to induce theseproblems.

All-solid-state rechargeable lithium batteries using oxide solidelectrolytes (Ox-SSBs) will be one of the candidates for nextgeneration rechargeable batteries with high energy density,safety, and long-life performance.

Thin-film Ox-SSBs have beeninvestigated by various researchers [1e3], and their excellent cyclestability (over 10,000 cycles) has been reported.

Although suchthin-film Ox-SSBs generally use a glass electrolyte, typically lithiumphosphorus oxynitride glass electrolyte (LiPON) with lower Liþconductivity (ca. 2  106 S cm1 at R.T.[4]), several kinds of oxidesolid electrolytes with two to three orders of magnitude higher Liþconductivity (103e104 S cm1) than LiPON have been discovered(Li0.34La0.51TiO3 [5], Li7La3Zr2O12 [6], Li2OeAl2O3eSiO2eP2O5eTiO2eGeO2 (NASICON-structured Liþ conductive glass ceramicssolid electrolyte (LATP) [7]).

Now that, it is demanded to developlarge-sized Ox-SSBs using such solid electrolytes with higher Liþconductivity especially for the applications to PHEV and EV.

Large-sized Ox-SSBs will apply an electrode-solid electrolytecomposite as with conventional rechargeable lithium-ion batteries(LIBs) using liquid electrolyte.

In case of the LIBs, liquid electrolytespenetrate into porous electrodes, and an electrode/electrolyteinterface is automatically formed.

On the other hand, in case of theOx-SSBs, both electrode and solid electrolyte are fragile and hardceramics, thus they need a densification process to enlarge theelectrode/solid electrolyte contact area.

Those composites havebeen developed by heating processes such as co-sintering [8], sparkplasma sintering [9,10], fusion bonding using low-melting solidelectrolyte [11], etc.

However, one of the crucial problems to applysuch a heating process is the formation of a mutual diffusion regionat the interface.

While the formation of a mutual diffusion regionworks as a driving force for solid-solid adhesion, this formation canretard interfacial Liþ transfer reaction and then reduce the batterypower density.

Therefore, it is important to examine how mutualdiffusion region formation provides resistive interface in detail.

Among the various kinds of electrodes and solid electrolytes, wefocused on LiNi1/3Co1/3Mn1/3O2 (NMC) as the electrode active material and LATP as the solid electrolyte.

The NMC shows small volume change (less than 1%) during charge-discharge reactions [12],which is an appropriate feature for Ox-SSBs.

Also, LATP is one of thehighest Liþ conductive solid electrolytes as mentioned above.

Here,the NMC films were deposited by pulsed laser deposition (PLD) onmirror-polished LATP sheets at different temperatures, which weremodel systems of the sintered NMC/LATP interface.

Sintering effects of the LiNi1/3Co1/3Mn1/3O2 (NMC) withNASICON-structured Liþ conductive glass ceramics solid electrolyte(LATP) were investigated using model systems, where NMC filmswere deposited on the LATP sheets at 700 C (NMC-700) or 900 C(NMC-900).

 The NMC-900 deposited on the LATP sheet showed ca.three orders of magnitude larger interfacial resistance (Rint) thanthat of the NMC-700 deposited on the LATP sheet, though thethickness of the mutual diffusion region was ca.30 nm in bothcases.

Around the NMC-900/LATP interface, Co in the NMC accumulate as a reduced valence and lithium-free crystalline phase willbe also formed.

These two problems must contribute to drasticincreasing of the Rint.

Formation of de-lithiated NMC from theinterface and its thermal instability at higher temperature may beconsiderable reason to induce these problems.

