Ti/Ge distribution in rhombohedral LiTi2-xGex(PO4)3 NASICON series has been analyzed by 31P Magic-AngleSpinning Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (MAS-NMR) spectroscopy and first principles Density Functional Theory (DFT)calculations.

Nuclear Magnetic Resonance results an excellent probe to follow Ti/Ge disorder, as it is sensitive to theatomic scale environment without long-range periodicity requirements.

In samples considered here, PO4 units are surrounded by four Ti/Ge octahedra, then, five different components ascribed to P(OTi)4, P(OTi)3(OGe), P(OTi)2(OGe)2,P(OTi)(OGe)3 and P(OGe)4 environments are expected in 31P MAS-NMR spectra of R͞3c NASICON samples.

However, 31PMAS-NMR spectra of analyzed series display a higher number of signals, suggesting that although overall symmetry remains R͞3c, partial substitution causes a local decrement in symmetry.

With the aid of first principles DFT calculations,ten detected 31P NMR signals have been assigned to different Ti4-nGen arrangements in the R3 subgroup symmetry.

In thisassignment, the influence of octahedra of the same or different R2(PO4)3 structural units has been considered.

 The influence of bond distances, angles and atom charges on 31P NMR chemical shieldings has been discussed.

Simulation of theLiTi2-xGex (PO4)3 series suggests that detection of ten P environments is mainly due to the existence of two oxygen types,O1 and O2, whose charges are differently affected by Ge and Ti occupation of octahedra.

From the quantitative analysis ofdetected components, a random Ti/Ge distribution has been deduced in next nearest neighbor (NNN) sites that surroundtetrahedral PO4 units.

 This random distribution was supported by XRD data displaying Vegard’s law.

In the past decades, lithium-ion conducting solids havebeen investigated for potential applications as electrolytesin all-solid state lithium batteries1-4.For that, high lithiummobility and electrochemical stability are required.

Mostof lithium ion conductors, such as Li3N, Li- alumina,lithium lanthanum titanates (Li3xLa(2/3)−xTiO3), LISICON(Li2+2xZn1−xGeO4), LIPON (xLi2O–yP2O5–zPON), lithiumsulphide glasses (Li2S–P2O5–LiI and Li2S–SiS2–Li3PO4)have either high ionic conductivity or high electrochemical stability, but rarely both4-10.In the case of LiR2(PO4)3,Li NASICON compounds have received much attentionbecause their high ionic conductivity and stability againstmoisture.

NASICON LiR2(PO4)3 framework is built up by R2(PO4)3units, where two RO6 octahedra share oxygens with threePO4 tetrahedra.

Tetrahedra and octahedra of contiguousR2(PO4)3 units are bounded to form the three-dimensionalnetwork of NASICON structure (Figure 1).

In this network, each octahedron is connected to six tetrahedra andeach tetrahedron to four octahedra.

Symmetry ofLiR2(PO4)3 compounds is usually rhombohedral R͞3c, although in some cases a triclinic distortion (space group C1̅)was detected14-18.In rhombohedral samples, Li+ions occupy M1 sites surrounded by six oxygen atoms14,15; but intriclinic phases, Li+ions are at intermediate sites M12,coordinated to four oxygen atoms between M1 and M2positions.

 In sodium NaR2(PO4)3 homologues, biggerNa cations only occupy M1 sites at ternary axes.

InLi1+xRIV2-xSxIII(PO4)3 series, with R= Ti, Zr, Hf, Ge, Sn andS= Al, Ga, In, the increment detected in Li conductivityhas been ascribed to the occupation of M3 (located in M2cavities) at expenses of M1 sites.

In order to understand physical and chemical properties of NASICON compounds, a detailed knowledge of thelocal structure and cation order/disorder is required.

Solid-State Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (SS-NMR) canbe used to study local atomic arrangements without longrange order.

Subtle differences in local environment produce changes on chemical shielding, achieving, in somecases, enough resolution to differentiate MAS-NMR components.

In the case of NASICON LiR2(PO4)3 materials,each P tetrahedra is surrounded by four octahedra, whichpermits to follow the main features of octahedral cationdistribution around P atoms.

Density Functional Theory (DFT) calculations can beused to analyze the influence of next nearest neighbor(NNN) sites on the chemical shift of atoms.

The comparison between experimental NMR and DFT-calculatedparameters has previously allowed the assessment ofatomic arrangements, where diffraction data were notconclusive.

Optimization of structural parametersmakes possible a better analysis of electronic arrangement in chemical bonds.

In particular, the influence ofbond angles and lengths on 31P NMR chemical shieldinghas been previously tested with DFT techniques.

The aim of the present work is the analysis of Ti/Ge distribution in the LiTi2-xGex(PO4)3 series using 31P MASNMR spectroscopy.

For a better understanding of deduced parameters, a parallel NMR and DFT study of thisseries has been performed and the assignment of experimental signals to specific environments done.

With theaid of DFT, the sensitivity of NMR chemical shift to atomscharges, bond distances and bond angles has been investigated.

The quantitative analysis of 31P NMR spectra hasbeen used to deduce main characteristics of the Ti/Gedistribution.

The solid solution LiTi2-xGex (PO4)3 was investigated by31P NMR spectroscopy and first principles DFT calculations.

The symmetry deduced from XRD patterns isrhombohedral R͞3c but 31P MAS-NMR spectra suggestlower local symmetries for intermediate compositions.

DFT technique has permitted the study of local disorder in long term ordered systems.

The use of lower symmetry allows the local investigation of different Ti/Gearrangements, but increases the computational cost.

Thestrategy followed here to perform DFT calculations was tosplit the problem into several simple ones, preserving thesymmetry as high as possible taking into account the S.G.obtained in structural refinements.

To allow differentcation substitutions, only some symmetry elements wereeliminated.

Specifically, seven R3 models were used todescribe different Ti/Ge arrangements.

Simulation of the LiTi2-xGex (PO4)3 series suggests thatdetection of ten P environments is mainly due to theexistence of two oxygen types, O1 and O2, whose chargesare differently affected by Ge and Ti occupation of octahedra.

On this basis, detected bands display a multiplicitypattern 1:(2:2):(1:2:2:1):(2:2):1 that differs from 1:4:6:4:1expected for R͞3c symmetry where four octahedral sitesare equivalent.

Mono-substituted models differentiate R1from R2 and di-substitution generates an additional differentiation between R sites of the same type.

The splittedTi4-n Gen components display intensities that agree withthe random occupation of octahedral sites by Ge and Tications.

