Preparation of sodium zirconium silicate phosphate (NaSICon), Na1+xZr2SixP3 – xO12 (0.25 ≤ x ≤ 1.0), thin films hasbeen investigated via a chemical solution approach on platinized silicon substrates.

Increasing the silicon content resultedin a reduction in the crystallite size and a reduction in the measured ionic conductivity.

Processing temperature was alsofound to affect microstructure and ionic conductivity withhigher processing temperatures resulting in larger crystallitesizes and higher ionic conductivities.

 The highest room temperature sodium ion conductivity was measured for an x = 0.25composition at 2.3 3 10 – 5 S/cm.

The decreasing ionic conductivity trends with increasing silicon content and decreasing processing temperature are consistent with grain boundary anddefect scattering of conducting ions.

S OLID-STATE ion-conducting thin films are of interest forsmall-scale and mobile energy storage applications.

Theuse of solid-state ion conductors as separators in ion batterychemistries is advantageous under consideration of safetyand packaging requirements.

For example, in lithium ionbatteries solid inorganic ion conductors can be inherentlymore robust against dendrite formation,2 which can piercepolymer membranes leading to short circuits and potentialfor combustion of liquid electrolytes.

Existing solid-state thinfilm battery technologies rely primarily on configurationswith lithium phosphorus oxynitride (LiPON) ion conductors.

The ease of preparation by physical vapor approaches, ability to deposit films at room temperature, and electrochemicalstability over a broad voltage range makes LiPON an attractive option.

LiPON, however, is hindered by a relatively lowlithium ion conductivity (~2.3 9 106 S/cm at 25°C),3 whichcan impart a large internal resistance to the battery and limitusage in applications requiring high power performance.

Thislimitation has led to investigations of alternative separatormaterials with higher ionic conductivities.

Processing andelectrochemical stability challenges of these alternative ionconductors have limited their deployment.

To circumvent these challenges, research into sodium ionbatteries has been undertaken.

Here, the existence of superionic conductors such as b-Al2O3 and Na1+xZr2SixP3xO12(sodium super ionic conductor, or NaSICon) presents anopportunity for the preparation of high power solid-statebatteries.

To be applicable for thin film batteries, however,preparation methods of these materials must be demonstrated.

We have previously shown that the phosphate endmember of NaSICon, NaZr2P3O12, can be prepared via achemical solution deposition approach using an alkoxidebased chemistry.

We demonstrated that preparation on platinized silicon substrates results in preferentially (012)-textured films with room temperature ionic conductivities ashigh as 5 9 107 S/cm.

This value is two times higher thanhas been reported for bulk materials of the same composition,8 which we attribute to increased density—the bulkceramics were reported to be 85%–90% dense—in the thinfilm samples.

This high ion conductivity with respect to bulkceramic counterparts notwithstanding, this value remains lowcompared to other thin film ion conductors, such as LiPON.

A means to increase the ionic conductivity of NaSICon isto substitute silicon (and an additional sodium for chargebalance) for phosphorus.

By replacing phosphorus with silicon, the size of the lattice openings through which sodiummust travel are increased, leading to increasing ionic conductivity with increasing silicon content.

Room-temperatureionic conductivities of 6 9 104 S/cm are possible for compositions substituting two silicon for phosphorus (x = 2),10which is the composition of peak ionic conductivity in NaSICon.

Compositions containing silicon in excess of x = 2result in a decrease in ionic conductivity owing to a decreasein the size of the lattice openings for sodium transport.

Whilethese trends have been widely demonstrated in bulk materials,11 reports on the preparation of silicon-containing NaSICon films are limited.

 In many of the reports that doexist it is not readily evident that phase-pure NaSICon filmshave been successfully prepared.

In this work we present ourefforts to incorporate silicon into NaSICon thin films prepared via chemical solution deposition on platinized siliconsubstrates.

We will show that small amounts of silicon(x = 0.25) can be incorporated with significant increases inthe ionic conductivity, but that further increases in the siliconcontent do not result in commensurate increases in ionic conductivity.

This diminished (and decreasing) ionic conductivityfor silicon levels >0.25 is attributed to decreased crystalliteand grain size, resulting in an increased number of grainboundaries and possibly defective crystallites for the giventhermal constraints imposed by the substrates.

In summary, we have prepared Na1+xZr2SixP3xO12 thinfilms in the composition range of x =0.25 to x = 1.0 viachemical solution deposition.

The following general trendswere found:(1) Increasing the silicon content from x = 0.25 to 1.0resulted in a decrease in crystallographic texture anda decrease in the average crystallite size in the films.

Increasing process temperature from 750°C to 800°Cresulted in an increase in the average crystallite sizefor most compositions.

The highest room-temperature ionic conductivity wasobserved for the x = 0.25 composition processed at800°C.

Increasing the silicon content and/or decreasing the processing temperature resulted in a decreasein the measured ionic conductivity.
The observed trends of decreasing ionic conductivitywith increasing silicon content can be correlated witha decrease in crystallite size.

