Na3V2(PO4)3 (NVP) is regarded as a promising cathode for advanced sodiumion batteries (SIBs) due to its high theoretical capacity and stable sodium(Na) super ion conductor (NASICON) structure.

However, strongly impededby its low electronic conductivity, the general NVP delivers undesirable ratecapacity and fails to meet the demands for quick charge.

Herein, a novel andfacile synthesis of layer-by-layer NVP@reduced graphene oxide (rGO) nanocomposite is presented through modifying the surface charge of NVP gel precursor.

The well-designed layered NVP@rGO with confined NVP nanocrystalin between rGO layers offers high electronic and ionic conductivity as well asstable structure.

 The NVP@rGO nanocomposite with merely ≈3.0 wt% rGOand 0.5 wt% amorphous carbon, yet exhibits extraordinary electrochemicalperformance: a high capacity (118 mA h g−1at 0.5 C attaining the theoreticalvalue), a superior rate capability (73 mA h g−1at 100 C and even up to41 mA h g−1at 200 C), ultralong cyclability (70.0% capacity retention after15 000 cycles at 50 C), and stable cycling performance and excellent ratecapability at both low and high operating temperatures.

The proposed methodand designed layer-by-layer active nanocrystal@rGO strategy provide a newavenue to create nanostructures for advanced energy storage applications.

The development of energy storage systems with green chemistry, high efficiency, long life, high safety, and low cost is one ofthe biggest challenges faced by human society.

Throughoutthe current energy storage technologies, the battery systemsrepresent one of the most promising candidates with highenergy efficiency for large-scale smart grid energy storage systems (ESSs).

However, the limited lithium resource inearth is detrimental to the further application due to the possible increasing costand unstable energy supply.

Therefore, there is an urgent demand for developing alternative energy storage deviceswith low cost while maintaining a comparable performance to LIBs.

Among them,sodium-ion batteries (SIBs) have becomethe worldwide focus owing to abundantresources and low cost.

To develophigh-performance SIBs, it remains challenging to discover/develop suitableelectrode materials (especially cathode)to satisfy the requirement of long-termcycling stability and rate-capability.

Owing to larger radius of Na+ thanthat of Li+ (0.98 vs 0.69 Å), variouscathode materials with large open frameworks, including layered transitionmetal oxides[19–25] and polyanionic compounds,[2,13,18,26–33] have been developed for(1) the improved sodium storage capacity,(2) the facilitated Na+ diffusion in the lattice, and (3) the restricted structure degradation caused by Na+ insertion/extraction.

The NASICON(sodium (Na) super ion conductor) NaxM2(NO4)3 (M = transition metal, N = P5+, Si4+, S6+, and Mo6+) structure with 3D largeopen framework allows for rapid and reversible ion diffusion inthe lattice, which is now developed as electrode with promisingelectrochemical performance.

 Among these, the Na3V2(PO4)3(NVP) becomes a “shining star” with high sodium diffusionability and remarkable high energy density (i.e., 400 Wh kg−1).

However, the high ionic diffusion ability of NVP is accompaniedwith poor electronic conductivity,[35] which results in the low utilization of active materials even at low rates.

In order to obtainremarkable performance of NVP, the hurdles of poor rate capability and cycling stability need to be further addressed.

Recently,carbon-coated active nanocrystals embedded in a porous carbonmatrix, which demonstrated excellent rate performance andcycling stability for Li3V2(PO4)3 cathodes,[36,37] as well as for NVPcathodes.

 In general, the porous carbon content is usuallyhigh, which may lead to the decrease of tap density and entirecell volumetric energy density.
 Li and co-workers reportedadaptive graphene gel films as a highly compact electrode withcontinuous ion and electron transport network.

Such layer-bylayer structure delivered superior rate performance with highpacking density.

Considering the advantages of graphene forimproving the electrochemical performance and the intrinsicNASICON structure of NVP,[44–48] the construction of layer-bylayer systems composed of graphene and NVP sheets will be anacceptable attempt, which exhibit improved electrochemical performance.

 Relative research has rarely been reported.

Herein, for the first time, we developed a novel, straightforward and self-assembly approach for the fabrication of layer-bylayer structured NVP@reduced graphene oxide (NVP@rGO)nanocomposites based on the interfacial coupling of grapheneoxide nanosheets (GO-NSs) and NVP/acetylacetone (acac) gel.

Through the hydrogen bonds and amphiphilic interactionsbetween the GO-NSs and NVP/acac gel, the NVP/acac gel uniformly and stably disperse in the GO matrix.

After freeze-dryingand annealing, GO is reduced to rGO in the reducing atmosphere to obtain the layer-by-layer structured NVP@rGO composite.

The rGO matrices provide facile and rapid electron transport while the stable NASICON structure of NVP offers superiorion diffusion ability.

The resulted electrochemical performance ofthe NVP@rGO nanocomposite is impressive: a remarkable highrate capacity of 41 mA h g−1(35% of the full capacity) at 200 C(22 A g−1), in which the discharge process can be completed inonly 6.7 s.

A long cycling life with capacity retention of 70% after15 000 cycles demonstrates the stable structure of our designedlayered composites.

Furthermore, our designed NVP@rGO nanocomposite also displays stable cycling performance and excellentrate capability at both low and high operating temperatures.

A novel layer-by-layer NVP@rGO composite is synthesizedthrough modifying the surface charge of NVP gel precursor.

Combining the advantages of NVP and rGO, the novel layerby-layer structure offers high electronic and ionic conductivity,rapid Na+ diffusion, and electron transport pathway, and stablestructure during sodiation/desodiation, leading to the excellentrate capability and ultralong-life cycling stability.

With very lowcarbon content (only ≈3.0 wt% rGO and 0.5 wt% amorphouscarbon), this NVP@rGO cathode displays superior rate capability (91 mA h g−1at 50 C, 73 mA h g−1at 100 C, 41 mA h g−1at 200 C) and ultralong cyclability (63 mA h g−1 at 50 C after15 000 cycles).

Moreover, the NVP@rGO nanocomposite stillshows stable cycling performance and excellent rate capabilityat both low and high operating temperatures.

 Our work demonstrates that the novel layer-by-layer NVP@rGO is a very promising cathode for the high performance SIBs.

We believe thatthis effective strategy can also be extended to other cathode oranode materials for advanced energy storage applications.

