Inspired by the concept of “polymer-in-ceramic”, a composite poly(Ɛ-caprolactone) (PCL)/ceramic containing LiTFSI is prepared and investigated as a solid electrolyte for all-solid-state batteries. The composite with the optimum concentration of 45 wt% LiTFSI and 75 wt% Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3 (LAGP, NASICON-type structure) exhibits a high ionic conductivity (σi= 0.17 mS cm−1) at 30 °C, a transference number of 0.30, and is stable up to 5.0 V. The composite electrolyte is a flexible and self-standing membrane. Solid-state LiFePO4//Li batteries with this composite electrolyte demonstrate excellent cycling stability with high discharge capacity of 157 mA h g−1, high capacity retention of 96% and coulombic efficiency of 98.5% after 130 cycles at 30 °C and 0.1 C rate. These electrochemical properties are better than other PCL-based all-solid-lithium batteries, and validate the concept of “polymer-in-ceramic” by avoiding the drawback of lower conductivity in prior “polymer-in-ceramic” electrolyte at high concentration of the ceramic.
Although the lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) presently dominate the market of energy storage, many efforts of research are currently made to replace them by solid-state lithium metal batteries (SSLMBs) in the near future for several reasons. The first one is the safety concern. The substitution of the flammable carbonate liquid electrolytes by non-flammable solid electrolytes would solve the problem of thermal runaway responsible for the battery fires. In addition, the substitution of graphitic carbon by lithium metal on the negative electrode side will increase importantly the energy density of the battery. To fulfill the purpose, however, the solid-state electrolyte (SSE) must simultaneously satisfy the following conditions: (a) It must be compatible with lithium, i.e. not be reduced in contact with Li. (b) It must not be oxidized on contact with a high-voltage cathode. (c) It must be soft enough to accommodate the volume change without loss of contact with the electrodes despite the volume change of the electrodes during cycling. (d) It must be mechanically strong enough to prevent the formation of dendrites on the lithium side, and without cracking during cycling. (e) Finally, it must have an ionic conductivity σi ≥ 10−4 S cm−1 at room temperature. The difficulty to fulfill simultaneously these issues explains the necessary for intensive research on solid electrolytes. Solid electrolytes can be divided into different families. Inorganic solid-state electrolytes comprise sulfur-based and oxygen-based materials. Sulfur-based solid-state electrolytes are very good ionic conductors, but they are very sensitive to moisture and their electrochemical stability at anode potentials is usually too low for practical use. Oxygen-based solid-state electrolytes have a lower conductivity. However, some of them, in particular lithium-garnet solid electrolyte composite ceramics, have emerged as a new class of SSEs owing to their good ionic conductivity, chemical stability vs. lithium metal, and wide electrochemical window. Among garnets, Li7La3Zr2O12 (LLZO) has attracted tremendous interest owing to a high ionic conductivity up to 10−3 S cm−1 after doping. However, it must be protected against humidity. A NASICON-type ceramic, Li1+xAlxTi2-x(PO4)3 (LATP), has also attracted much attention, but it is reduced when in contact with lithium anode, which leads to the formation of electron-conducting phases, and thus, an increased short-circuiting risk . Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3 (LAGP) has also been considered owing to its high conductivity that can reach 1 × 10−3 S cm−1. Li et al. prepared a high-salt-concentrated composite electrolyte with LAGP, poly(propylene carbonate) (PPC) and 80 wt% of lithium bis(fluorosulfonyl)imide (LiFSI). Owing to this high concentration, the ionic conductivity reached 10−4 S cm−1 at ambient temperature, the Li-ion transference number was as high as 0.75, and the anodic stability was up to 4.5 V vs. Li+/Li. The LiFePO4//Li cell with LAGP/PPC-LiFSI 80 wt% composite electrolyte delivered a specific discharge capacity of 138.3 mA h g−1 at 0.1 C and a high capacity retention of 97.1% after 100 cycles at room temperature. LAGP has also been chosen to fabricate hybrid solid electrolytes composed of 3D ordered bicontinuous ceramic and polymer (epoxy) microchannels. The ceramic channels provide continuous pathways, which help in maintaining a high ionic conductivity between the electrodes, while the polymer channels permit improvement of the mechanical properties compared to those of the ceramic alone, in particular, mitigation of the brittleness of ceramics. The electrical and mechanical properties were obtained with high conductivity (1.6 × 10−4 S cm−1) at room temperature. These examples illustrate that it is necessary to associate ceramic with polymer to take benefit of the synergistic properties of these two components. This is usually done by dispersing inorganic fillers in a polymer matrix, especially ceramic fillers. These configurations can be named “ceramic-in-polymer” electrolytes, meaning that the concentration of ceramic is small, typically few weight 
percentage. Therefore, they are more suitable for small-scale flexible energy storage devices. Recently, however, Chen et al. proposed the concept of “polymer-in-ceramics” electrolytes with high mechanical strength and safety, thus more appropriate for a large battery used in electric vehicles. Chen et al. chose the poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO) as the polymer, and Ta-doped LLZO (LLZTO) garnet as particles. The LiTFSI was added to improve the conductivity. This “polymer-in-ceramic” electrolyte contained 80 wt% LLZTO and 60 wt% LiTFSI. The cell with this “polymer-in-ceramic” electrolyte was thus tested at 55 °C, in which case it delivered a capacity of 127 mA h g−1 stable over 50 cycles. The PEO-LiTFSI composite has been the most studied and used so far, because of its compatibility with lithium anode. The drawback, however, is its slow oxidation above 3.9 V. Another limitation is the low conductivity of PEO, preventing its use at room temperature. 
Inspired by this result, we report here the fabrication of a “polymer-in-ceramic” electrolyte with NASICON-type LAGP as the ceramic, and poly(Ɛ-caprolactone) (PCL) as the polymer matrix. The reason for choosing another polymer is motivated by the decrease of the ionic conductivity of PEO-LiTFSI-LLZTO with the concentration of LLZTO, as soon as the concentration exceeds 10%, so that the conductivity of the “polymer-in-ceramic” electrolyte was reduced to 10−5 S cm−1 at room temperature. PCL was chosen as host material for several reasons. It is known for its noticeable natural degradation, a property becoming increasingly important with the aim to reduce the environmental impact, and it has a good mechanical strength. This polymer has a large electrochemical stability window up to 5 V vs. Li+/Li.PCL has a low melting point around 65 °C and a glass transition temperature Tg about −60 °C. Due to semi-crystalline at room temperature, the kinetics is very low. This property and the fact that the value of Tg is almost the same as that of PEO imply that the conductivity is very small. Indeed, the ionic conductivity of pure PCL film is only 3.67 × 10−10 S cm−1 at room temperature, even smaller than that of PEO. However, the variations of the ionic conductivity σi as a function of the concentration of LiTFSI investigated by Ng et al. show that σi starts to increase when more than 20 wt% LiTFSI is inserted into pure PCL, to reach a maximum σi =1.17 × 10−4 S cm−1 at room temperature for a LiTFSI concentration x = 45 wt%, one orders of magnitude larger than the conductivity of PEO-based “polymer-in-ceramics”. At lower salt concentration x, the ionic conductivity increases with x as the number of free ions increases. At larger salt concentration, σi decreases again, because the ions get too close to each other, which increases the possibility of ion aggregations, which in turn reduces the overall number of effective charge carriers and ion mobility. Another advantage comes from the very small modification of the polymer when it is mixed with fillers. Various types of filler, like clay, carbon nanotubes, silica, hydroxyapatite and TiO2 have been incorporated into PCL. However, even the TiO2 ceramic filler failed to interact significantly with PCL, since the introduction of x = 45 wt% TiO2 in ambient environment did not modify the XRD pattern of PCL, i.e., did not modify the crystallinity, unless the surface of TiO2 has been modified by propionic acid and n-hexylamine to increase the interfacial interaction by van der Waals bonding. We can then expect that the introduction of a large concentration of ceramic particles in the PCL-LiTFSI 45 wt% composite polymer will not decrease the ionic conductivity, at contrast with the result experienced with PEO. Actually, we can even expect some increase of conductivity, since the conductivity of LAGP is 1 × 10−3 S cm−1, and where the LAGP particles percolate, they provide an alternative Li+-conduction pathway with better conductivity than the composite host. Actually, we found that maximum ionic conductivity (0.17 mS cm−1) of LAGP in PCL-LiTFSI 45 wt% is obtained for a LAGP concentration of 75 wt%. In this work, the structural properties of this composite polymer electrolyte are reported. Full compatibility with lithium metal is demonstrated. The all-solid-state LiFePO4//Li cell, with this composite as the solid electrolyte exhibits a specific capacity of 157 mA h g−1, and high capacity retention of 96% with coulombic efficiency of 98.5% after 130 cycles at 30 °C and 0.1 C rate, demonstrating the ability of this “polymer-in-ceramic” electrolyte (PCE) to be used for all-solid-state batteries.  
Poly(Ɛ-caprolactone) (PCL, Capa 6500, Perstorp), Lithium bis (trifluoromethanesulfonyl) imide (LiTFSI, Solvay, electrochemical grade). Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3 (LAGP) was purchased from MTI corporation. Anhydrous tetrahydrofuran (THF, 99.8%, Aladdin) was used as solvent. All chemicals mentioned above were stored in a glovebox (H2O and O2 < 0.1 ppm).  
The solid-state polymer electrolyte was prepared by a solution casting procedure. PCL and LiTFSI were dissolved into THF. After stirring for 12 h, LAGP was added into above uniform solution (weight measured with respect to the PCL). The mixture was stirred for 6 h to achieve satisfactory homogeneous solution. After that, the mixed solution was cast onto a Teflon mold, following by evaporation and drying at 60 °C under high vacuum conditions for 24 h. For comparison, polymer electrolyte of PCL with same ratio of LiTFSI was prepared. 
LiFePO4 cathode material, Super-P and PVDF were mixed in weight ratio of 8:1:1 to obtain the cathode slurry. Then the slurry was cast onto Al foil by blade. After drying at 120 °C in vacuum oven for 12 h, the cathode foil was pouched into pieces with a diameter of 12 mm before assembling in the coin cell (2025 type). The mass loading of the LiFePO4 cathode was approximately 1.5 mg cm−2.
ing electron microscopy (SEM) (Hitachi S5500). All the samples were coated with a very thin gold layer for SEM measurements. The crystallinity of PCL, PCL doping with LiTFSI and composite solid polymer electrolyte was analyzed by X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements performed with a Rigaku Smartlab diffractometer in a 2θ range of 10°−50°. Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) 
The morphologies of the electrolyte and the electrodes materials after cycling were examined by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) (Hitachi S5500). All the samples were coated with a very thin gold layer for SEM measurements. The crystallinity of PCL, PCL doping with LiTFSI and composite solid polymer electrolyte was analyzed by X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements performed with a Rigaku Smartlab diffractometer in a 2θ range of 10°−50°. Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) measurements were performed using a NETZSCH DSC 200F3 apparatus.
Ionic conductivities were measured by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) between 0 to 50 °C in the frequency range from 10−2 Hz to 106 Hz on a Parstat 4000 electrochemical station. The composite electrolyte was sandwiched between two stainless-steel (SS) blocking electrodes to form the test cells. The cells were kept at each test temperature for 30 min to reach thermal equilibrium. The electrochemical stability of the cells was measured using cyclic voltammetry (CV) and linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) in a Li/PCE/SS configuration. The potential range was between −0.2 V and 6 V vs. Li+/Li at a scanning rate of 0.1 mV s−1. Li-ion transference number (tLi+) was measured by a combination measurements of AC impedance and DC polarization following the reported potentiostatic polarization method. A 10-mV polarization bias was applied to a Li/PCE/Li symmetric cell for these measurements. The tLi+ was calculated by the Bruce−Vincent−Evans equation : where Ii and Is represent the initial and steady state currents; Ri and Rs are the resistances of the passivation layer before and after polarization. Both electrochemical stability and Li-ion transference number measurements were performed at 30 °C. To investigate the interface stability between Li and electrolyte, a polarization test of these symmetric cells was employed at a constant current density of 0.1 mA cm−2 for a long-term cycling. After 800 h of cycling the chemical compounds of the SEI layer on Li anode were examined by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) (ESCALab 220i-XL) measurements to identify products at the interface. 
In order to demonstrate the feasibility of the PCE, all-solid-state polymer LiFePO4//Li battery was assembled and tested. The cycling performance of the cells was evaluated using a charge-discharge apparatus (Land, CT2001A) in a temperature-controlled dry room (30 ± 2 °C). All the cells were charged and discharged at a constant current mode between 2.5 and 3.8 V. The charge–discharge test at different current densities were also examined under the same condition. 
The morphology of the hybrid electrolyte membrane is shown in Fig. 1. 300 nm-LAGP particles (Fig. S1) are dispersed uniformly in PCL shown in Fig. 1(a and d). The pictures of the composite film (Fig. 1b) exhibit a white flexible self-standing membrane, which is beneficial to suppress the formation of lithium dendrites. The cross-section image of the membrane (Fig. 1c) shows that the thickness is about ~170 μm and no obvious porous structure can be observed. 
For a linear aliphatic polyester, high crystallinity is a key factor that limits the ionic conductivity, hindering the use of PCL-based polymer electrolytes at room temperature. Hence, the crystallinity of PCL-LAGP was measured by XRD and DSC, comparing with that of pure PCL. As shown in Fig. 2(a), typical Bragg reflections of pure PCL at 2θ = 21° (110), 21.2° (111) and 23° (200) can be detected, which correspond to the orthorhombic planes of PCL. Upon addition of LiTFSI, the peak intensities of PCL decreased, due to the plasticizing effect of the Li salt in agreement with the result reported by Ng et al. for the same composition. This decrease of crystallinity will contribute to increase the Li+ conductivity of this matrix at room temperature, since the correlation between the ionic conductivity and amorphization is known for decades. The addition of LAGP to the electrolyte just added the XRD lines associated with LAGP, without any significant modification of the part of the spectrum associated to PCL-LiTFSI, taking into account that the peak of LAGP at 2θ = 21° overlaps with a peak of PCL.  Fig. 2(b) displays the DSC curves of pure PCL, PCL with Li salt and the “polymer-in-ceramic” material. A sharp endothermic peak at 67 °C is observed for pure PCL, indicating the melting temperature (Tm1). This temperature is shifted to Tm1 = 55.9 °C after the incorporation of LiTFSI. In addition, the peak intensity of the endotherm associated to this transition is decreased. The shift of Tm1 toward lower temperatures confirms the beneficial effect of the salt to reduce the crystallinity of the PCL and is consistent with the result of the XRD analysis. A new endotherm can be observed in the composite polymer electrolyte including LAGP, associated to a eutectic mixture (Tm2 = 30.6 °C); on another hand, the melting transition temperature remains unchanged at Tm1 = 55.9 °C, confirming that the LAGP had no significant interaction with the polymer composite.  
Table S1 shows the ionic conductivity increases with Li salt ratio increased. The similar tendency can also be observed in the previous report published by Ng et al.]. However, the membranes with Li salt ratio higher than 45 wt% are not adequate for forming self-standing films (Fig. S2). As the best compromise between ionic conductivity and membrane forming ability, the optimal Li salt concentration is 45 wt%. For “polymer-in-ceramic” electrolytes, concentration of active Li ions and Li transport pathways are two factors, which contribute to ionic conductivity proved by Zheng et al. The concentration of active Li ions rises with increasing active fillers content. Meantime, on increasing active fillers amount to a critical point, particles connect to form a percolated network, leading Li transport pathways transition from the polymer matrix to the percolated network. As shown in Fig. 3(a), the addition of LAGP to PCL-LiTFSI 45 wt% is beneficial to ionic conductivity, up to the concentration of 75 wt% LAGP, where a maximum of conductivity is observed at 0.17 mS cm−1. Thus, 75 wt% LAGP is the critical point in our system. However, in PCL-LAGP 100 wt%, the content of polymer matrix is too low for binding the glass ceramic powders efficiently, leading to lower ionic conductivity. Similar phenomenon can also be observed in PEO-LAGP 90 wt% published by Jung et al. Eriksson et al. proposed that polyesters contain a comparably weaker interaction with the nanoparticles than the corresponding polyethers. Therefore, the ionic conductivity of PCL-LiTFSI 45 wt%-LAGP 75 wt% (1.7×10−4 S cm−1) at 30 °C is higher than PEO-based “polymer-in-ceramic” electrolytes such as PEO-LAGP 70 wt% (10−5 S cm−1) at temperature lower than 45 °C. Furthermore, the ionic conductivity of PCL-LiTFSI 45 wt%-LAGP 75 wt% is obviously higher than other PCL-based “ceramic-in-polymer” electrolytes such as PCL-Al2O3 15 wt% (10−5 S cm−1) at 30 °C reported by Eriksson et al.. The temperature-dependent EIS measurements show that the values of impedance change from 1342 to 20 Ω with temperature increased from 0 to 50 °C (Fig. S3). Fig. 3(b) illustrates the Arrhenius plot for the ionic conductivities of the membrane with 45 wt% LiTFSI and 75 wt% LAGP. The activation energy of the membrane was calculated by using the Arrhenius equation: where A is the pre-exponential constant, R is the ideal gas constant, and Ea is the activation energy for lithium ion conduction. The activation energy of the composite membrane is calculated to be 21 kJ mol−1, which is much lower than that of other PEO-based composite polymer electrolytes such as 98.3 kJ mol−1 for PEO-LAGP reported by Xu et al. 
The Li-ion transference number (tLi+) was determined by a DC polarization combined with impedance spectroscopy using a symmetrical Li/PCL-LITFSI 45 wt%-LAGP 75 wt%/Li cell. As shown in Fig. 4(a), the current response to the applied static potential polarization varies from an initial current (Ii = 30.7 µA) to the steady state (Is = 10.6 µA). Meanwhile, the interfacial resistance changes from Ri = 64.49 Ω to Rs = 65.72 Ω. Thus, Li-ion transference number (tLi+) is calculated to be 0.30 by using equation (1). It is comparable to the similar system (PEO-LAGP) and (PAN-LLZO), in which case, however, these systems were “ceramic-in-polymer” electrolyte with a few concentrations of ceramic. The anions are more mobile than the cations in PEO-LiTFSI polymer electrolytes, which results in their Li-ion transference number being usually lower than 0.5; this is also true for PCL-LiTFSI. However, this value of 0.30 is better than in pure PCL (tLi+ = 0.23) (Fig. S4). This larger tLi+ is favorable for a higher rate capability and a reduction of the growth of Li dendrite. 
To demonstrate the electrochemical stability of this “polymer-in-ceramic” used as an electrolyte, cyclic voltammetry (CV) and linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) measurements were performed, as shown in Fig. 4(b). The cathodic scan shows a couple of reversible redox peaks between −0.2 and 0.16 V versus Li+/Li, corresponding to lithium plating and stripping on the stainless-steel working electrode. No oxidation current can be observed up to 5 V. These results indicate that this composite electrolyte exhibits good electrochemical stability. For better comparison, the electrochemical performances of PCL-LITFSI 45 wt%-LAGP 75 wt% and other composite electrolytes are summarized in Table S2. 
The stability of the interface between solid electrolyte and Li anode is crucial in solid-state batteries. Fig. 5(a,b) compares the Li+ plating/stripping behaviors of Li/PCL-LiTFSI 45 wt%/Li and Li/PCL-LITFSI 45 wt%-LAGP 75 wt%/Li symmetric cells at current density of 0.1 mA cm−2 at 30 °C. After 60 h cycles, the overpotential of Li/PCL-LITFSI 45 wt%-LAGP 75 wt%/Li is stable at about 0.1 V, which indicates the formation of a passivation solid electrolyte interphase (SEI) layer. The overpotential of Li/PCL-LiTFSI 45wt%/Li is stable at 0.7 V after 100 h. Furthermore, after 800 h cycling, no voltage oscillation can be observed, demonstrating the absence of any growth of Li dendrites during the cycling of Li/PCL-LITFSI 45 wt%-LAGP 75 wt%/Li. On the contrary, the overpotential of Li/PCL-LiTFSI 45wt%/Li increases dramatically after 330 h caused by the heterogeneous lithium deposition. These results confirm that the interfacial compatibility between PCL and Li anode is improved by the introduction of LAGP, as LAGP does not alter the mechanical properties of the electrolyte. Fig. 5(b) displays the behavior of a Li/PCL-LITFSI 45 wt%-LAGP 75 wt%/Li symmetric cell cycled at different current densities (0.1, 0.15 and 0.2 mA cm−2). Stable voltage profiles without short circuit can be observed at 0.1 and 0.15 mA cm−2 with low overpotential (< 0.2 V). However, the overpotential increases gradually at 0.2 mA cm−2, proving that a limit current density has been reached. When the current density decreases again, the overpotential is recovered showing a highly reversibility. This result indicates that the fluctuation of overpotential is mainly caused by the limited kinetics of the “polymer-in-ceramic” membrane. After 330 h cycling, the Li//Li symmetric cells were disassembled. The morphologies of Li anodes within different electrolytes are displayed in Fig. 5(c,d). The surface of the Li anode after cycling with the PCL-LiTFSI 45wt% membrane become rough and cracked, leading to the short circuit. Meantime, the heterogeneous lithium deposition can be clearly observed on the surface of Li anode and the regular-shaped lithium dendrites are formed. To the contrary, with the “polymer-in-ceramic” membrane, the surface of the Li anode remains homogeneous after cycling, demonstrating the superior interfacial compatibility of this electrolyte against the Li-metal anode. 
To examine the chemical compounds of the SEI layer on Li anode, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurements were performed after 800 h of cycling. As shown in Fig. 6(a-d), five different charge states of the carbon are observed in the C 1s spectrum. The peak at binding energy of ~293.0 eV is attributed to CF3, which is generated by the reduction of LiTFSI. The peak located at ~284.8 eV is associated to the C-C bond. The other three peaks at ~286.6, ~288.7, and ~289.9 eV can be attributed to alkoxides, carboxylates, and carbonates, respectively, resulting from the simple contact of the Li foil with the composite polymer. The two visible components in O 1s spectrum are attributed to C=O (~532.9 eV) and Li2CO3 (~531.5 eV). In the F 1s spectrum, in addition to the peak associated to LiTFSI (~689.0 eV), an obvious LiF peak (~684.9 eV) can be detected. Meanwhile, the salt degradation product Li2SO3 (~167.4 eV) can be found in the S 2p spectrum. These results suggest that the SEI film mainly consisted of products generated by the decomposition of polymer and LiTFSI salt. In particular, the SEI layer is enriched with a high content of LiF, which is very helpful in preventing lithium dendrite formation and protecting the Li metal from further reduction, and contributes to the long-term stability of the cell. 
To evaluate the feasibility of this “polymer-in-ceramic” electrolyte in a solid-state battery, LiFePO4/PCL-LITFSI 45 wt%-LAGP 75 wt%/Li cells were assembled and tested at 30 °C. As Fig. 7(a) exhibits, the initial discharge capacity is 153 mA h g−1 with a coulombic efficiency of 98.5% at 0.1 C. After five cycles, the capacity increases gradually due to the wetting process of the electrode interface by the electrolyte. In the following cycles, the reversible capacity is stable at about 157 mA h g−1 with 99% coulombic efficiency. The LFP//Li cells were tested at various C rates, as shown in Fig. 7(b). At 0.1 C, 0.2 C, 0.5 C and 1 C, the cell delivers capacities of 157, 137, 101 and 54 mA h g−1 respectively. The capacity is recovered at 153 mA h g−1 when returning to 0.1 C after 1 C cycling. Therefore, the cell has not been degraded, and the decrease of capacity at 1 C is simply due to the limited ionic conductivity of the electrolyte at room temperature. In addition, the capacity retention is 96% after 130 cycles, much better than the result obtained with pure PCL used as the electrolyte at 30 °C (Fig. 7c). These results show that this composite polymer electrolyte has the potential to be used in solid-state polymer batteries at 30 °C. 
As an all-solid-state lithium battery working at 30 °C, the performance of the LiFePO4//Li cell in this work is better than the results obtained with other PCL based electrolytes like PCL-LiTFSI plus 15 wt% ceramics or without ceramic but with incorporation of carbonate repeating units, even though the polycarbonates have a high transference number. In the same way, poly (trimethylene carbonate) and PCL copolymers have been fabricated, but they are considered as possible electrolyte working only at higher temperatures, due to their lower ionic conductivity.  The “polymer-in-ceramic” electrolyte concept was proposed and tested initially with the use of PEO as the polymer. However, the conductivity decreased drastically upon introduction of the ceramic, which was a drawback of the “polymer-in-ceramic” concept, preventing the use of the electrolyte at room temperature. In the present work, we found that with the use of PCL as the polymer, which does not interact with the ceramic, it was possible to validate this concept without this drawback, with the fabrication of a self-standing and flexible electrolyte that can operate at 30 °C and has better electrochemical properties than the other PCL-based electrolytes. 
The PCL-LITFSI 45 wt%-LAGP 75 wt% was prepared and can be used as “polymer-in-ceramic” electrolyte in an all-solid lithium battery operating at 30 °C. The crystallinity of PCL is tuned through the introduction of the LAGP, leading to a high ionic conductivity (1.7×10−4 S cm−1) at 30 °C with a high Li-ion transference number (tLi+ = 0.3). Meantime, the electrochemical window of this composite electrolyte is up to 5 V, a significant improvement over polyether-based electrolytes. It demonstrates excellent interface stability toward Li metal. After 800 h of Li//Li charge-discharge cycles, high fluorinated SEI is detected by XPS, which is favorable for interface stability. LFP//Li cells with this electrolyte delivered a capacity of 157 mA h g−1, and high capacity retention of 96% after 130 cycles at 30 °C and 0.1 C rate with coulombic efficiency of 98.5%. By improving the electrochemical properties with respect to prior electrolytes using PCL in all-solid-state batteries, and avoiding the drawback of lower conductivity in prior “polymer-in-ceramic” electrolyte at high concentration of the ceramic, the present work validates this concept of PCE electrolyte proposed for a large battery used in electric vehicles. 