A fuel-cell-type gas sensor based on the membrane electrode assemble (MEA) composed of protonexchange membrane (Nafion) and Pt/C sensing electrodes was fabricated for detection of CO at roomtemperature.

The Pt/C electrodes materials were synthesized from Vulcan XC-72 carbon powders andhexachloroplatinic acid (H2PtCl6).

This paper mainly focused on the effect of various dispersants (ethylene glycol (EG) tetraethyl orthosilicate (TEOS), glycerol and EG/polytetrafluoro-ethylene (PTFE)) on theperformance of the presented sensor.

Results revealed that the sensor utilizing EG as the dispersantelicited the highest response current toward 50 ppm CO.

 The current of the sensor was linearly correlated with CO concentration in the range of 1–200 ppm, which sensitivity was 88 nA/ppm.

In addition,the 90% response and recovery times of the sensor toward 50 ppm CO were 22 and 24 s, respectively.

Besides, the prepared CO sensor also had a good repeatability and acceptable selectivity.

CO is a major atmospheric pollutant that can cause serious poisoning to the human body by binding tightly to hemoglobin in theblood and producing reductions in cellular respiration [1–3].

CO iscommonly generated by incomplete combustion of fuel in vehicles.

Thus the monitoring of toxic CO has gained increasing attentionfrom governments and researchers.

Different kinds of chemical sensors for CO detection havebeen developed, including conductive-type sensors that usethe semiconductor oxides, catalytic combustion-type sensors,electrochemical-type sensors and solid electrolyte-type sensors[4–6].

Among these sensors, semiconductor oxide-type sensorsusing the metal oxides such as SnO2 [7–9], ZnO [10–12], Zn2SnO4[13] and LaCoO3 [14] have been widely investigated in recent yearsbecause of their low cost and simple fabrication process.

For example, Wurzinger and Reinhardt [15] found that SnO2 sensors dopedwith 2 wt.% Pt exhibit maximum sensitivity to CO at around 220 ◦C.

However, semiconductor oxide-type sensors require to be heatedto promote the redox reactions.

The catalytic combustion-type sensors detect CO gas via resistance changes resulting from the heat generated by the combustionof CO gas on Pt coil catalyst.

fabricated a catalytic combustion-type CO sensor that shows superior performancefor CO detection at 60 ◦C with good selectivity by employing Ptloaded CeO2–ZrO2–ZnO as the CO oxidizing catalyst.

The catalyticcombustion-type sensors also present the disadvantage of nonapplicability in the absence of oxygen.

Electrochemical sensors operate at room temperature withouta heater.

These sensors often use H2SO4 and noble metals (Pt) asthe liquid electrolyte and sensing electrode, respectively [17].

Thusthey are usually rather bulky and easy to be dried.

Moreover, theyrequire good sealing to prevent electrolyte leakage.

Solid electrolyte-based CO sensors use yttria-stabilized zirconia (YSZ) [18–23] and NASICON (Na3Zr2Si2PO12) [24,25] as theelectrolytes.

This type of sensor exhibits good sensitivity and selectivity after optimization of the composition and microstructure ofthe gas-sensing electrodes as well as the electrolytes.

evaluated the effect of surface area on the performance ofnanocomposite Au–YSZ electrodes and found that sensors withlow-surface area Au electrodes were more sensitive to CO thannanostructuredcomposite electrodes withlarge surface areas.

Solidelectrolyte sensors also present several drawbacks, such as complex fabrication processes and high working temperature.

Sensors based on proton exchange membranes (Nafion) havebeen developed for operation at low working temperature.

discussed the performance of fuel cell-type sensors using Nafion 117 membranes and found that the sensitivityof the sensors at low CO concentration was higher than that ofcombustion-type sensors [26,27].

 These sensors are environmentfriendly with excellent stability, accuracy and long lifetimes.

Theycan operate at room temperature without any power consumption.

Moreover, the sensor current shows a nearly linear relationshipwith CO concentration.

MEA, as an indispensable component of the Nafion-based electrochemical CO sensors, often features two structures: one is thethick-layer electrode, which is made up of the catalyst layer, diffusion layer and Nafion membrane; the other is called the thin-layerelectrode, which contains the catalyst layer and Nafion membranewithout a diffusion layer [28–30].

 The Nafion membrane functions as the solid electrolyte to conduct the protons.

The catalystlayer, containing Pt/C nanoparticles, is used for accomplishing theoxidation-reduction process.

When combining the catalyst layerwith Nafion film, three methods are applied: the Takenaka–Torikai(T–T) method, the impregnation–reduction (I–R) method and thehot–pressing (H–P) method.

When fabricated by H–P method,the Pt/C nanoparticles give riseto a physical boundary with the Nafion film.

Thus, the dispersantsare indispensable to closer contact between the Pt/C nanoparticlesand Nafion film.

The Pt/C nanoparticles can also be well dispersedin these solvents.

Parts of the dispersants are volatilized during thehot-pressing process, resulting in large active surface area for redoxreactions.

Beyond that, the dispersants should be hydrophobic tomake it easier for gas diffusion.

In this work, an excellent interface between the Nafion membrane and catalyst layers was fabricated using the solubilizedNafion solution.

Two hydrophilic solvents (TEOS, EG) and twohydrophobic solvents (glycerol, PTFE) were used to disperse thePt/C particles.

The effects of four dispersants on microstructuresand performance of the resulting sensors were determined.

n summary, a Nafion-based fuel cell type CO sensor utilizing four dispersants, i.e., EG, PTFE, TEOS and glycerol, wasdeveloped by the H–P method.

FESEM images and surface areameasurement reveal that the MEA with EG exhibits the bestmicrostructure among the dispersants surveyed.

The sensitivities for sensors with different dispersants increase in the orderof EG/PTFE < glycerol < TEOS < EG.

The sensor with EG as the dispersant gives the best sensitivity of 88 nA/ppm and a very lowdetection limit of 1 ppm against CO.

 The prepared sensor demonstrates a response current of 5.16 A, rapid response (22 s) andrecovery (24 s) times toward 50 ppm CO.

It also shows goodrepeatability and acceptable selectivity.

