In this paper synthesis and catalytic properties of new catalysts based on double lithium-zirconiumphosphate (LiZr2(PO4)3) with monoclinic NASICON-type structure, doped by indium, niobium and molybdenum are discussed.

The obtained samples with particle size of 50–300 nm were characterized byX-ray diffraction, scanning electron microscopy and X-ray microanalysis.

The synthesized samplesexhibit catalytic activity in the dehydration and dehydrogenation reactions of ethanol conversion.

Themain products were acetaldehyde, diethyl ether, hydrogen, C2- and C4-hydrocarbons.

Indium- andmolibdenum-doped samples were characterized by high activity in dehydrogenation processes, whileniobium-doped was more active in dehydration processes.

 The highest selectivity in diethyl ether formation was achieved for LiZr2(PO4)3 and Nb-doped samples (90 and 60% at 300 ◦C).

The highest hydrogenyield (up to 60%) was obtained with the use of In-doped catalyst.

LiZr2(PO4)3 and Mo-doped samples arealso noticeable for high C4-hydrocarbons formation, selectivity to which reaches 60% at 390 ◦C.

Use of a100% hydrogen selective palladium-ruthenium alloy membrane increases hydrogen yield by 20%.

Low-temperature fuel cells are the most promising alternativeenergy sources.

 For their implementation the new ways of hydrogen production based on renewable raw materials are developed.

One of the most promising methods is bio-alcohols conversion.

Atthe same time, alcohols can be used for obtaining a number ofcommercially important products, such as hydrocarbons, ethers,aldehydes, ketones, hydrogen, and so on.

In this regard, new catalysts for the selective alcohols conversion into desired productsneed to be found.

Complex phosphates are considered as one of the promisingtypes of catalysts for the alcohols conversion.

Materials with NASICON (NA Super Ionic CONductor) structure type have generalformula AxB2(ZO4)3, where A - is alkali or alkaline earth element,B - polyvalent element (Zr, Ti, Sc etc.), Z - phosphorus or silicon.

Their structure is presented by edge-linked BO6 octahedra and ZO4tetrahedra.

A-cations are located in the cavities of this structure[1,2]Interest in these compounds is determined primarily by theirhigh ionic conductivity [3–5], which is achieved due to presenceof conduction channels in their structure [2].

Other advantagesof the NASICON-type compounds are high chemical, thermal andradiation stability.

The variability of structure allows both iso- andheterovalent doping [6,7].

This defines a wide range of possibleapplications of these compounds [8–10] as lithium power sources[11,12], in fuel cells [13], in sensors [14–16], in radionuclide cleaning [17] and in catalysis [18–20].

The ability to heterovalent substitution is important for the catalytic applications, since it allows to vary the number and strengthof acid(BrønstedandLewis) andredox centers atthe surface.

Chemical and thermal stability allows to use catalysts based on suchcompounds inconditions in whichthemetal catalysts aredegraded.

Therefore, attempts to use these compounds as catalysts in alcoholconversion were made by the number of authors [21–28].

During the catalytic process certain products could be selectively separated or fed to the reaction mixture through membrane[29–31].

The main advantage of this method is the possibilityof thermodynamic equilibrium shifting due to removal of product from reaction mixture.

This is especially evident in reactionswith hydrogen participation when membranes based on palladium alloys are used, because of their high hydrogen permeability[32–34].

Hydrogen, obtained in such reactors, requires no furtherpurification due to high selectivity of such membranes.

Nowadaysmany researches are devoted to carrying out catalytic processes inmembrane reactors [35–39].

The aim of this work was to obtain the LiZr2(PO4)3 NASICONtype phosphates with heterovalent substitution of the zirconiumand phosphorus ions and their testing in the process of ethanolconversion.

It was assumed thatthe substitution of some zirconiumions on indium or niobium will change the acid-base properties ofcatalysts and their activity in dehydration processes.

At the sametime, replacement of the phosphorus on molybdenum will makethem active in redox dehydrogenation processes.

The doped lithium-zirconium phosphate with NASICON structure canhave catalytic activity indehydrogenationanddehydrationprocesses.

It was assumed that a Pd-based membrane allows toextract hydrogen from the reaction mixture and displace the reaction equilibrium.

For this purpose the obtained catalysts wereinvestigated in the membrane reactor with Pd-Ru membrane.

Advantages ofthis rector and membrane properties were discussedalso.

The single-phase catalysts were obtained based on double lithium-zirconium phosphate with NASICON-type structureLiZr2(PO4)3 doped by In, Nb, and Mo, with a particle size lessthan 200 nm.

 All samples exhibit activity in the ethanol dehydration and dehydrogenation processes.

The main products are theC2- and C4-hydrocarbons, diethyl ether, acetaldehyde and hydrogen.

It has been shown that the doping by indium increases theyield of acetaldehyde and hydrogen, doping by niobium - diethylether and ethylene.

Molybdenum incorporation increases the catalyst activity in the ethanol dehydrogenation rate and reduces thetemperature ofthe reaction on 60 ◦C.

Itis worth mentioned that C4-hydrocarbons are formed on LiZr2(PO4)3 and Li0.9Zr2P2.9Mo0.1O12catalysts with selectivity up to 60% at high temperatures.

Carrying out the process in a membrane reactor leads to theincrease in the hydrogen yield due to the thermodynamic equilibrium shift and increase in the ethanol conversion.

