Sodium-ion conducting glass–ceramics composed of Na1+xAlxGe2 − xP3O12 (x = 0.5) crystalline conductingphase were successfully prepared by heat-treating the parent glass at different temperature and time, andwere characterized with DSC, XRD, CV, SEM and alternative current impedance.

The relationship between theionic conductivity and crystallization conditions (time and temperature) of the sodium aluminum germaniumphosphate (NAGP) glass–ceramic was investigated.

Results show that the NASICON phases containing Al3+ inall these glass–ceramics are isomorphous with NaGe2P3O12 and stable against sodium metal.

The highest totalconductivity of the glass–ceramic material, 9.27 × 10−5 S cm−1 at 140 °C, is obtained by highly crystallizingthe glass at 750 °C for 12 h.

The reasons for the enhancement of the ionic conductivity in the glass–ceramicsare discussed in view of the dependence of microstructure morphology on the heating condition.

 It could be attributed to its good crystallization of the conductive phase NAGP, uniform grain size and possible optimizing conductive pathway of Na+ ions.

Sodium-ion batteries (NIBs) have attracted great attentions particularly in electric vehicles (EVs) and large scale electrochemical storagefor biomass, solar radiation, wind and waves and so on because of thehuge abundant sodium resources,low cost (Na2CO3 0.07–0.37 € kg−1vs.

 Li2CO3 4.11–4.49 € kg−1) and very suitable redox potential(Eo(Na+/Na) = 2.71 V versus standard hydrogen electrode; only 0.3 Vabove that of lithium) [1–7].

The very high reactivity of sodium withmoisture and oxygen, the quest for safer and more reliable electrolytesystems is therefore urgent, and solid electrolytes (SEs) are promisingcandidates in this regard [8–10].

However, most polymer electrolytes coupling a polymer with a plasticizing organic solvent for NIBs still present some drawbacks [11,12].

Inthis respect, inorganic solid electrolytes (solid sodium ion conductors)present potential advantages like a large electrochemical stability window, highly thermal stability, absence of leakage and pollution, a highresistance to shocks and vibrations and the possibility of easy miniaturization [13,14].

One prominent example of the solid Na+ ion conductoris Na-β″-Al2O3 that is mostly used in the high temperature sodium batteries (sodium–sulfur batteries) as an electrolyte with an ionicconductivity of 0.2–0.4 S cm−1 at 300 °C [4].

Another extensively studied Na+-conducting solid electrolytes are NASICON (Natrium (Na)Super (S) Ionic (I) Conductor (C), general formula is AM′M″P3O12)type compounds which demonstrate sodium ionic conductivities inthree-dimensional frameworks (any crystallographic direction) incomparison with Na-β-Al2O3 (layer structure) possessing only twodimensional Na+ mobility [15,16].

Solid solutions ofNa1+xZr2SixP3 − xO12 (NZSP, 0 ≤ x ≤ 3), firstly reported by Hong andGoodenough [17,18], are typical examples of NASICON-type compounds which are characterized by relatively large ionic conductivitiesin the order of 10−1 S cm−1 at 300 °C and 10−4 S cm−1 at ambient temperature [8,19].

Hence, the properties of the chemically stable Na+-conducting SEs with high sodium-conductivity at room temperature,good cation-exchange with electrode materials and so on shouldmake them possible for applications in room temperature all-solidstate NIBs with high safety [20].

However, high porosity and big grain boundary as well as the difficulties in obtaining the desired shapes of the sintered NASICON-type ionconductors affect their practical applications as SEs in NIBs [21].

Compared to the sintered materials, glass–ceramics can be made into desiredshapes and sizes more easily because of their pore-free and small grainsizes [22].

So far, few reports were dedicated to sodium ionic conductorswith NASICON-type structure containing Al cations, let alone the glass–ceramics with same composition.

Only Li+-conducting glass–ceramicscomposed with crystalline containing Al3+ NASICON phase have been reported [11].

Due to the close ionic radius of Al3+ compared to that ofGe4+, the Al cation is likely within the tolerability limit of NaGe2(PO4)3framework.

Furthermore, when NASICON-type sodium ionic conductorscontaining Al3 + are prepared, ALPO (aluminum phosphate) sidecompounds can be easily formed.

Phases such as berlinite (ALPO), withtetrahedral PO43− groups, are very stable.

Once formed, they do notreact to yield desired NASICON-type products [23–25].

In this study, we report sodium ion conducting glass–ceramicscontaining crystalline NASICON phase, Na1.5Al0.5Ge1.5P3O12, and itspreparation method.

 Al3+ in the glass–ceramics entered the structure of NASICON and partly substituted the Ge4+.

 Sodium ionic conductivity of the solid electrolyte is up to 9.27 × 10−5 S cm−1 at140 °C.

 Meanwhile, the effects of crystallization time and temperature on the ionic conductivity of the glass–ceramic have also been investigated.

The prepared ion conductor extends the family of theNa1+xAlxGe2 − xP3O12 system and provides great promise for practical application in room-temperature sodium ion batteries or chemical sensors.

Sodium ionic conducting glass–ceramic containing Na1.5Al0.5Ge1.5P3O12as the crystalline phase has been prepared by heat-treating the parentNa2O–Al2O3–GeO2–P2O5-based glass.

 The as-prepared composition extends the family of the Na1+xAlxGe2 − xP3O12 NASICON system.

Thesample treated at 750 °C for 12 h displays the highest ionic conductivityof 9.27 × 10−5 S cm−1 (140 °C) with activation energy of as low as0.53 eV.

 It could be attributed to its good crystallization of the conductive phase NAGP and uniform grain size.

Furthermore, the samples areelectrochemically stable at 5.5 V (vs. Na/Na+) at room temperature.

The good thermal and chemical stability, easy preparation and lowcost of the Na+-conducting glass–ceramic make it promising a candidate as electrolyte for batteries or chemical sensors.

