Naþ superionic conductor (NASICON) type Fe2(MoO4)3 with capacious ion diffusion tunnels and a flatdischarge plateau, is a promising cathode material for sodium ion batteries.

However, the sluggishelectrochemical kinetics limits its further development due to the poor electron conductivity and longNaþ diffusion path.

 In this work, a graphene wrapped Fe2(MoO4)3 nanoparticle composite was synthesized via a micro-emulsion method followed by annealing.

 The composite exhibits ultra-high rate capability (64.1 mA h g1 at 100 C, better than all the reported works) and good high-rate cycling stability(76% capacity retention after 100 cycles at 10 C).

The enhanced electrochemical performances are attributed to the unique composite structure with shortened ion diffusion distance and high electronconductivity.

Furthermore, the Naþ insertion/extraction mechanism of the composite is systematicallyinvestigated, based on in-situ X-ray diffraction (XRD) and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS).

Ourwork demonstrates that the graphene wrapped Fe2(MoO4)3 nanoparticle composite has great potentialfor high-rate sodium ion batteries.

With the insufficiency of lithium, lithium ion batteries (LIBs)can hardly meet the worldwide sustaining demand [1–5].

As acandidate, sodium ion batteries (SIBs) hold great promise to be thenext generation of energy storage devices due to the high abundance of sodium and the similarity of its electrochemical mechanism to that of LIBs [6–8].

However, the larger ionic radius ofNaþ (0.98 Å) in comparison with that of Liþ (0.69 Å) causes thelower Naþ diffusion coefficient and larger volume change, resulting in poor rate and cycling performances [9–13].

Unfortunately, some materials such as layered NaxCoO2 and olivinetype NaFePO4, being primarily and widely considered for SIBs dueto the success of their analog LiCoO2 and LiFePO4, failed to overcome the inherent limitations of SIBs on account of the narrow iondiffusion tunnels and the irreversible phase transition after Naþintercalation [14–17].

Therefore, new cathode materials with suitable structures for Naþ intercalation are urgently required to beexploited for SIBs.

Naþ superionic conductor (NASICON) with an ideal open threedimensional (3D) framework for Naþ transportation, has beenregarded as the optimal cathode material for SIBs [18–20] .Amongthese NASICON-type materials, only a few possess electrochemicalactivity, and iron molybdate (Fe2(MoO4)3) is one of them [21].

As acathode material for SIBs, Fe2(MoO4)3 is nontoxic and has a flatdischarge voltage plateau (2.6 V versus Naþ/Na), which showsgreat prospect for sodium ion storage [22].

Nevertheless, its further development is limited by the sluggish electrochemical kinetics caused by the poor electronic conductivity and the long Naþdiffusion path [22–26].

Compositing electrode active material withconductive agents is an effective approach to enhance the electronic conductivity [27–28].

So far, highrate Fe2(MoO4)3 cathode material has not been reported.

Thus, lowrate capability severely limits the further development ofFe2(MoO4)3.Reducing the sizes of the active material is aneffective way to improve the rate capability, because nanostructures can provide larger electrode/electrolyte contact area andshorter distance for ion transport [29–31].

Therefore, to obtainhigh performance Fe2(MoO4)3 cathode material, compositing withconductive agents and reducing the sizes of the particles should besimultaneously achieved.

Herein, we report a graphene wrapped Fe2(MoO4)3 nanoparticlecomposite synthesized via a micro-emulsion method followed byannealing.

As a cathode material for SIBs, the graphene wrappedFe2(MoO4)3 nanoparticle composite exhibits high rate capability(64.1 mA h g1 at 100 C) and good high-rate cycling stability (morethan 76% capacity retention after 100 cycles at 10 C).

The improvement of the electrochemical performance can be attributed tothe synergetic advantages of the nano-sized Fe2(MoO4)3 particlesand the high-conductive graphene, which provide not only shortened Naþ diffusion path but also effective electron transportation.

Furthermore, the Naþ insertion/extraction mechanism of thecomposite is systematically investigated by in-situ X-ray diffraction(XRD) and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS).

In summary, the graphene wrapped Fe2(MoO4)3 nanoparticlecomposite has been synthesized via a facile method, and exhibits aconsiderable capacity of 98.4 mA h g1 with a flat voltage plateauas a cathode material for SIBs.

Remarkably, a relatively highcapacity of 64.1 mA h g1 can be obtained under the ultra-highrate of 100 C.

The fast ion diffusion coefficient cooperating withthe reduced electronic transmission impedance ensures thesuperior electrochemical performances of the graphene wrappedFe2(MoO4)3 nanoparticle electrode.

Furthermore, the Na ion insertion/extraction mechanism of the composite is systematicallyinvestigated, based on in-situ XRD and XPS.

 The results above indicate that the graphene wrapped Fe2(MoO4)3 nanoparticle composite is a promising cathode material for sodium ion batteries.

