A rechargeable hybrid aqueous battery (ReHAB) containing NASICON-type M3V2(PO4)3 (M=Li, Na)as the cathodes and Zinc metal as the anode, working in Li2SO4-ZnSO4 aqueous electrolyte, has beenstudied.

Both of Li3V2(PO4)3 and Na3V2(PO4)3 cathodes can be reversibly charge/discharge with theinitial discharge capacity of 128mAh g−1 and 96mAh g−1 at 0.2C, respectively, with high up to 84% ofcapacity retention ratio after 200 cycles.

The electrochemical assisted ex-XRD confirm that Li3V2(PO4)3and Na3V2(PO4)3 are relative stable in aqueous electrolyte, and Na3V2(PO4)3 showed more complicatedelectrochemical mechanism due to the co-insertion of Li+ and Na+.

The effect of pH of aqueouselectrolyte and the dendrite of Zn on the cycling performance of as designed MVP/Zn ReHABs wereinvestigated, and weak acidic aqueous electrolyte with pH around 4.0–4.5 was optimized.

The floatcurrent test confirmed that the designed batteries are stable in aqueous electrolytes.

The MVP//ZnReHABs could be a potential candidate for future rechargeable aqueous battery due to their high safety,fast dynamic speed and adaptable electrochemical window.

Moreover, this hybrid battery broadensthe scope of battery material research from single-ion-involving to double-ions -involving rechargeablebatteries.

Energy storage and transition systems, including Li//air1,2, Mg/air3, metal (V, Sn, Ni)//air4, Zn//air5, Tin/Air6,aqueous rechargeable lithium/sodium batteries1,7–10, redox flow batteries11, Li//I212, Li//sulphur13, and Li//Se14,Fuel cell15,16, capacitor17,18, have been developed rapidly to satisfy the various energy demands of electronics andelectric automobiles.

Recently, based on aqueous rechargeable battery -rechargeable hybrid aqueous batteries(ReHABs)- have been widely developed6–9 on account of their safety, environmental friendliness, and low cost.

ReHAB is indeed a novel power system, mainly because of its separated electrochemical mechanism in cathode and anode.

In most aqueous rechargeable batteries, only one type ion (Li+) involved in the electrochemicalreactions traveling back and forth between electrodes, such as the well-known “rocking chair” mechanism inlithium-ion batteries.

In ReHABs, lithium ions are intercalated/extraction in the composite cathode (second-orderelectrode), while zinc ions are deposited/dissolved from the zinc metal anode (first-order electrode).

This novelbattery broadens the scope of battery research from single-ion-involving to double-ions-involving rechargeablebatteries.

Zinc is abundant, low cost and environmental friendly in the nature with a high theoretical capacity(820mAhg−1) as anode.

 An adaptable negative potential (−0.762V vs.SHE)19, enable it to be constructed withother cathodes in aqueous electrolytes.

Several rechargeable zinc batteries, including nickel//zinc battery20, zinc//air battery21 and Zn//Na0.95MnO27, Zn//LiMn2O48,22 have been investigated in aqueous systems.

However, there are not many choices of cathodes using in ReHABs for the limitation of their potentials vs.Zn2+/Zn.

Contradictorily, too low cathode potential also reduces the power density of cathodes, while too highpotential will destroy the aqueous electrolyte, as well as decomposition of water.

Totally, the cathodes whichcan be used in aqueous electrolyte required aqueous stability, adaptable charge/discharge potential plateauscompared with that of decomposition of water.

Although the 4 V materials such as LiMn2O423,24, LiCoO225 orLiNi1/3Co1/3Mn1/3O226 were introduced into aqueous electrolyte batteries, their potential plateaus in aqueousmedia are close to water decomposition potential.

Therefore, those cathodes with potential plateaus below 4 Vshow more promising in aqueous electrolyte batteries.

Only few cathodes are more possible in Li-containingReHABs with possible good cycling performance in aqueous electrolytes, including Li3V2(PO4)3 (LVP)27–30,Na3V2(PO4)3 (NVP)31–34, LiFePO410, and MnO235,36.The monoclinic Li3V2(PO4)3 and rhombohedral Na3V2(PO4)3 have attracted considerable interest as promising cathode candidate in non-aqueous lithium-ion batteries due to their thermodynamically stable structure, highcell-voltage and fairish theoretical specific capacity (LVP: 191mAh g−1for extraction of three Li+ ions between3.0–4.6V, 133 mAh g−1for extraction of two Li+ ions between 3.0–4.2V vs.

Li+/Li; NVP: theoretical dischargecapacity with 118mAhg−1, with two Na+ ions being completely extracted up to 4.0V versus Na+/Na).

The(PO4)3− polyanions facilitate to form a three dimensional pathway for Li+ insertion /extraction with a very highLi ion diffusion coefficient (from 10−9to 10−10 cm2/s).

As cathodes of hybrid ion batteries, Li2NaV2(PO4)3(LNVP)were also investigated in organic lithium ion electrolytes37,38.These two phosphate salts, LVP and NVP, haveobvious different insertion/extraction mechanisms in organic electrolyte, including the inserted/extracted lithium ion number per unit formula and plateaus voltages as well structure stability, but their behaviour in aqueouselectrolyte seldom is evaluated.

In this work, we studied these cathodes to expand their application in aqueouselectrolyte batteries.

By calculation, the discharge plateau voltages (vs. Zn2+/Zn) of LVP should be at 1.25 V, 1.35 V, 1.75 V and2.2V.

 Detailedly, the plateau at 1.25V and 1.35V is correspond to the insertion of one lithium ion, and the plateau at 1.75V is for the insertion of the second lithium ion, which are lower than the oxygen evolution reaction(OER) of water.

 The plateau voltage around 2.2V is higher than that of OER, therefore the third lithium of LVP isimpossible to be extracted in aqueous electrolyte.

The theoretical energy density of LVP//Zn and NVP//Zn batteries calculated by the total weight of cathodes and Zn anode is about 164Wh kg−1and 76Wh kg−1, respectively.

Therefore, the electrolyte stability in ReHABs with LVP cathode should be higher than that of ReHABs containingLiMn2O4 (2.05V vs.Zn2+/Zn), considering that the working potential of LiMn2O4 is closer to the OER of aqueouselectrolyte.

 LVP also has higher charge/discharge plateaus than that of LiFePO4(1.45V vs.Zn2+/Zn), therefore,the power density should be optimism.

 The discharge plateau voltages (vs. Zn2+/Zn) of NVP should be at 1.35V,and one Na+ ion can be extracted.

The fast ion transfer and reversible charge/discharge performance of MVP inorganic encourage us to study its applications in aqueous electrolytes.

Like most cathodes in organic or aqueouselectrolyte, MVP cathodes also face some challenges, such as structure stable ability and cycling performancewhen they are introduced into a new system, which attract our interest to study.

Inspired by this fact, we developed a new binary ion-containing ReHAB with M3V2(PO4)3 (MVP, M=Li, Na)and zinc as cathode and anode respectively, operated in an aqueous electrolyte containing Zn2+ and Li+ (Na+)(Scheme 1).

 Their electrochemical performance and dynamic reaction mechanism are investigated.

As well, themain effect of pH and concentration of electrolyte, float charge current and Zn dendrite on the electrochemicalperformance were evaluated.

