The paper reports the development of high temperature in situ fully solid electrochemical sensor for sulfurcontaining gases monitoring.

The sensor is based on Ag+β^-Al2O3 membrane with Ag2S or Ag2SO4 layer on its surface.

Silver beta alumina was manufactured by high temperatureion exchange technique in AgNO3 melt.

The original designof the in situ sensor was developed.

Three types of galvaniccells were used for the investigation of electromotive force(EMF) response on SO2 partial pressure both in oxygen-freeand oxygen-containing atmosphere in the temperature range673–923 K.

The data obtained was compared with followingNernst equations.

The applicability of the sensor for in situmeasurements in industrial processes is discussed.

Along with NOx, CO, and CO2, sulfur-containing gases (i.e.,H2S, RSH, SO2, SO3) are hazardous for human health and theenvironment.

Among them, sulfur dioxide is of particular importance as it comprises the atmosphere of modernmegalopolises (with the concentration of several ppm) andaccompany mineral oil, fossil, and shale gas extraction.

Specifically, Privolzhsky and Ural shale oils in Russia, so asEast Texas shale oil in the USA of Devon and Cambrianperiods bedding, enriched by sulfur should be mentioned.

Processing of such feedstock results in large SO2 amountselaboration and, thus, fast engine and equipment corrosion,high vessel exhaust, and acid rains [1].

High sensitive toolenabling in situ determination of combustion gases composition is required for efficient emissions reduction.

So far, SO2 content in oils and gasoline is controlled indirectly at the ambient temperature by means of IR spectroscopy[2], gas chromatography [3, 4], optical [5], and amperometric[6] sensors.

However, since gas composition could changeupon cooling, all these methods require long and complicatedsample preparation procedure.

Latter makes express analysisimpossible.

Low sensitivity and sensor properties degradationin the aggressive sulfur and sulfur dioxide-containing atmosphere are among their other disadvantages [4].

High temperature electrochemical sensors based on solid electrolytes (SE)are regarded as the unique alternative to existing methods asthey are well suited for SO2 determination in combustion exhaust gas stream [7–10].

The first attempts towards high temperature electrochemical sensor development were reported by Gautier in 1977 in[11, 12] and then Jacob in 1979 [13].

Plenty of reports [14–18]and patents [19–21], devoted to high temperature electrochemical SO2 sensor designs, have been published since thattime.

Despite many attempts made, only prototypes for hightemperature SO2 sensor are known to date.

Rekas [23]describe the approaches, sensing mechanism and materialsused in the development of CO2 and SO2 sensors based onsolid electrolytes.

Existing solid sensors for SOx gas have aquiet complex design and do not allow in situ measurementbecause of challenges in proper SE fabrication.

Therequirements to SE for high temperature in situ SO2 sensorfabrication are following: fast ion transport at elevated temperatures (673–973 K), long-term use in the aggressive heatedSO2 and oxygen air-containing atmosphere and broad working temperature range.

Due to its chemical stability and highconductivity level at above 600 K, silver beta alumina appearsto be a perfect candidate for SO2 in situ measurements[24–27].

In contrast to other SE, commonly used for SO2sensors fabrication as Na+ β- and β^-alumina [22, 28, 29],NASICON-based SE [22, 30–33], composite YSZ-type sensors doped by Li2SO4, Na2SO4 [34, 35], Li2SO4-CaSO4 [36],and Ag2SO4-based electrolytes [37], the use of Ag+β^-Al2O3does not require an auxiliary electrode and significantly facilitates sensor design.

The original fully solid electrochemical cell with electrolyte based on cylindrical Ag+β^-Al2O3 was proposed in [38,39].

Porous platina was used as work electrode and silver wireas a reference.

However, porous Pt gets readily poisoned uponthe measurement in the harmful environment and under elevated temperatures.

 The cell for gaseous sulfur and H2S control was designed in [40].

The construction involved the catalytic work gaseous electrode (MoSx impregnation), which iseffective for gaseous sulfur monitoring with the fugacity of100 Pa (i.e., 10−4 atm) in the absence of oxygen.

Knownexperimental sensors provide good SO2 response in the concentration range from 10 to 200 rpm or, sometimes,1000 ppm.

However, their batch production is not possiblebecause of narrow range of working temperatures, potentialdrift, fragility, and inability to conduct the reliable in situ measurements in the heated aggressive atmosphere of industrialprocesses.

Thus, the goal of the present work was the development of high temperature sensor for sulfur-containing gasesallowing the in situ measurement in the broad temperaturerange from 673 to 923 K.

The developed ceramics synthesis technique allows to manufacture Ag+β^-Al2O3 solid electrolyte of high conductivitylevel for further solid electrochemical SO2 sensor fabrication.

The original design of the high temperature in situ sensor forsulfur-containing gases allows SO2 measurements both inheated oxygen-free and oxygen-containing atmosphere inthe air ambience.

In the oxygen-free atmosphere, sensor withAg+β^-Al2O3 membrane with Ag2S layer on its surface provide fast and stable response to pSO2 due to the reversiblereaction of silver sulfide formation.

However, in the presenceof oxygen sensor, EMF reversibly rises down to zero after 1 hmeasurement because of SO3 accumulation.

In heated air oxygen ambiance, the sensor with Ag+β^-Al2O3 membrane withAg2SO4 layer on its surface can be successfully applied.

Thedeviations of the sensor EMF from linear fit are observed justat low oxygen partial pressures.

