A Li-ion battery cathode with target stoichiometry LiTi0.08Fe0.92PO4 wasprepared by doping excess amount of Ti4+ into the olivine structure using solid-statereaction at 700 C.

Synchrotron X-ray diffraction (XRD) studies confirmed the presenceof a major olivine phase and NASICON-type ion-conducting Li3Fe2(PO)4 andLi2TiFe(PO4)3 impurities.

Further, the calculated lattice parameter values appear toconfirm Ti-doping in LiFePO4.Electron microscopy and particle distribution studies notonly revealed a slightly increased average particle-size and particle fragmentation butalso confirmed a fair distribution of Ti4+ ions in the prepared sample.

When tested forlithium storage properties, the LiTi0.08Fe0.92PO4 cathode delivered high specificcapacities and good capacity retentions (≤ 2% capacity loss after 50 cycles).

Besides,the cathode delivered impressive rate capabilities as specific capacities of 160 and 110mAh g-1at 0.1 and 11.4 C, respectively, were retained.

Although the average particlesize was slightly higher, the presence of ion-conducting NASICON-type species appearto contribute to the enhanced electrical conductivity and hence to the cathodeperformance of LiTi0.08Fe0.92PO4.Ever since its introduction by Padhi et al.in 1997, the olivine-type LiFePO4 hasattracted wide attention as cathodes for high-power lithium-ion battery applications dueto its relatively high theoretical capacity ( 170 mAh g-1), impressive cycle life, lowcost and environmental benignity [1].

The fundamental and stable polyanion unitnamely, (PO4)3-, elevates the Fe3+/Fe2+ redox couple to useful potential levels (3.4 V vs.Li/Li+) in commercially used liquid electrolytes [2].

In addition, the strong covalentbonding in the polyanion units facilitates stabilization of the olivine structure evenunder deep charging [3].

Unfortunately, olivine LiFePO4 suffers from low electronicconductivity ( 10-9S cm-1) and limited Li-ion diffusivity ( 10-14– 10-15 cm2s-1).

Toovercome these drawbacks, several strategies including particle-size minimization [4],mixing conductive phases [5], and cation doping [6, 7] have been pursued.

Interestingly,the strategy of cation doping in LiFePO4 and the consequential enhancement inelectrochemical properties has remained under debate since its introduction by Chung etal.

This study concluded that the solid-solution doping of supervalent cations intothe M1 (Li) sites of the olivine lattice tends to enhance its electronic conductivity (byeight orders of magnitude) and hence the electrochemical properties.

On the contrary,the formation of a percolating metal phosphide network on the particle surface wasclaimed to contribute to the enhanced electronic conductivities and hence electrodeproperties of LiFePO4 [8, 9].

Although computational studies revealed that theincorporation of tetravalent/pentavalent (M4+/5+) ions into the olivine lattice is notenergetically favorable, it was contended that doping effect is mainly influenced by ionkinetics during synthesis, in contrast to theoretical predictions that are based on justmetal ion parameters [10, 11].

Nevertheless, several studies have reported thepossibility of achieving up to ≤ 10 mol% of supervalent cation doping in LiFePO4 [12-21].

In fact, a recent study demonstrated 20% vanadium (V3+)-doping in a LiFePO4cathode using a combination of neutron and XRD techniques [22].

Moreover, accordingto Wang et.al, isovalent metal (Mg, Co, Ni) ion doping in LiFePO4 led to increasedionic conductivity and the enhanced rate capabilities was attributed to the possibleweakening of the Li-O bond, the larger bond length, and their smaller binding energies[23].

Meanwhile, NASICON-type species with appreciable ionic conductivity areknown to serve as potential solid electrolytes for battery applications [24-27].

Also, theincorporation of NASCION-type crystallites in to the amorphous domains of glassyelectrolytes tends to enhance its ionic conductivities [27-29].

Overall, the strategy tointroduce ion-conducting phases to improve electrical conductivities and hence theelectrode performance of LiFePO4 appears promising [30].

The present study, therefore, aims to develop highly performing cathodesincorporated with traces of NASICON-type ionic conductors by the excessive doping oftitanium (Ti4+) ion into LiFePO4 using high temperature solid-state reaction.

A previousstudy on a solution-based LiFePO4 cathode with excess Ti-dopant concluded that theinevitable formation of Li3PO4 appeared to degrade electrode properties [31].

However,the present cathode (LiTi0.08Fe0.98PO4) displayed high specific capacities, good capacityretentions and impressive rate performance versus lithium.

A Ti-doped olivine, LiTi0.08Fe0.92PO4 cathode was prepared by excessive Tidoping in the olivine structure using solid-state reaction at 700 C.

XRD studiesconfirmed not only the presence of a major olivine phase in addition to phase-separatedNASICON-type Li3Fe2(PO)4 and Li2TiFe(PO4)3 phases as ion-conductingimpurities/sources but also the doping of titanium (Ti) in to the olivine lattice.

Electronmicroscopy studies confirmed that a slight increase in average particle-size is observeddue to Ti-doping in LiFePO4.When tested for Li-ion storage properties, the preparedLiTi0.08Fe0.92PO4 cathode demonstrated enhanced specific capacities, good capacityretentions and impressive rate performances (160 mAh g-1at 0.1 C and 110 mAh g-1at11.4 C).

 The enhanced performance of the prepared LiTi0.08Fe0.92PO4 cathode is mostlikely due to the facilitation of ionic migration pathways formed by the NASICONparticles strategically placed between the olivine particles.

The ion-conduction paths inconjunction with the carbon-coating on the olivine particle surface may result in theformation of an electrical conducting nano-scale network that may ultimately contributeto the enhanced electrode performance of LiTi0.08Fe0.92PO4.