The local structure and mobility of lithium ions of the NASICON-type ionicconductor Li1+xAlxTi2−x(PO4)3 (with x = 0.0, 0.1, 0.2, 0.35, 0.5, 0.7 and1.0), synthesized using conventional solid-state reaction route, have beenstudied with solid-state nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) techniques.
Li,7Li, 27Al, 31P solid-state NMR experiments have been employed to tracethe structural changes with varying cation concentration.

The structuralevolution and the creation of new Al and P environments with changingcation contents were studied by magic-angle spinning (MAS) NMR measurements.

Li MAS NMR and 27Al triple-quantum MAS (3QMAS) showhigh-resolution spectra enabling site assignments and phase-purity inspections.

The temperature dependences of 7Li NMR spin-lattice relaxation(SLR) rates for different compositions yield important information on thelithium ion mobility in the systems.

 Li ion jump rates, the activation energies and the dimensionality of Li diffusion were deduced from the SLR experiments.

A vacancy migration model has been proposed for the Li+ ionicdiffusion process in pure-phase Li1+xAlxTi2−x(PO4)3 prepared by solid-statereaction.

 Above a certain threshold value of x (0.5) additional phosphatephases appear which slow down diffusion.

 This phenomenon can be observed from 6Li exchange spectroscopy.

The optimum cation concentrationfor maximum ionic mobility in the phase-pure Li1+xAlxTi2−x(PO4)3 systemcan be read directly from the solid-state NMR results.

Highly mobile lithium ion containing solids are excellent candidates forlithium ion battery (LIB) materials.

While electrodes are usually madesolely of solids, polymer electrolytes along with organic solvents are widelyused as electrolytes in LIB’s.

For all-solid-state batteries, the electrolyte hasto be replaced with a fast Li+ ion conducting solid.

LISICON (Li-superionicconductor)1 and NASICON (Na-superionic conductor)2structured solidscan be used as potential solid electrolytes.

NASICON-type lithium titanium phosphate (LiTi2(PO4)3 ; abbreviated as LTP) is one of such systems.

By substituting Al for Ti the system Li1+xAlxTi2−x(PO4)3 (abbreviatedas LATP) with highly mobile Li+ ions can be achieved.

The LATP ceramics have very high bulk ionic conductivity of the order of 10−3 S cm−1being three orders of magnitude higher than that of the unsubstituted LTP.

LATP possesses three-dimensional channels suitable for fast Li ion diffusion.

The factors affecting this diffusion process include the concentration (x) ofLi ions, the porosity of the system, the grain boundary contribution, the formation of additional phases of oxides and phosphates, and their structuralstability on sintering.

Therefore the synthesis route has a very importantinfluence on the ionic conductivity of LATP.

LTP crystallizes in the rhombohedral structure (Figure 1) with R3c spacegroup.

The unit cell is composed of corner sharing TiO6 octahedra and PO4tetrahedra.

 Li is located in oxygenated distorted octahedral sites (Li1) between the TiO6 planes.

In LATP, some of the Ti4+ sites are occupied byAl3+ and the net charge is compensated by Li+.

The additional Li occupiesirregular 8-O-coordinated sites (Li2).

The Li+ ionic diffusion mechanismin LATP involves the Li1-Li2-Li1 pathway.

The Al-substitution has beenshown to enhance the three-dimensional Li diffusion.

Similarly differenttrivalent cations can induce this effect to enhance the Li+ ionic conductivity.

When the value of x is above 0.5, additional phases like TiO2, Li4P2O7,TiP2O7 and/or AlPO4 (amorphous and crystalline) can be formed.

Belowx = 0.5, the lattice parameters decreased with increasing cation content,as shown in Figure 1.These small changes in the structure may lead tochanges in ionic transport properties.

However, the influencing factors suchas the sintering procedure and the formation of the additional phases causing changes in intrinsic conductivity properties of LATP have rarely beenstudied.

Nairn et al.studied Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3 with 27Al and 31P MAS NMRand observed that Al3+ is not only substituting Ti4+ but occupies also a verysmall percentage of the P-sites.

Hence, the authors contradicted a previousresult4 where only Ti-substitution was observed.

This suggests the importantinfluence of sample preparation methods on the structure of LATP.

Nairnet al. observed a single Li-site by a 7Li NMR powder pattern being characterized by a quadrupole coupling constant (CQ) of 45 kHz.

The asymmetryof the 31P NMR signal was attributed to different P-sites which appearupon Al-substitution.

In a following paper Forsyth et al. with the helpof 27Al MAS NMR, observed a considerable amount of Al3+ reaching thetetrahedral sites of LATP with x = 0.3, whereas there was no tetrahedrallycoordinated Al visible for LATP with x = 0.1.The increasing asymmetryof the 31P NMR signal with x suggested the formation of additional P-sites.

This was accompanied with an increase of the 7Li CQ indicating a reductionof structural symmetry.

 In addition, the work details the effects on replacing the PO4 tetrahedra with VO4 and/or NbO4.9 With 27Al MAS NMR,Best et al. observed five-fold coordinated Al in addition to tetrahedral andoctahedral Al in Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3.With some stoichiometric changes(Li1.3+4yAl0.3Ti1.7−y(PO4)3) the authors managed to remove the tetrahedralAlPO4 phase, thereby increasing the grain-boundary conductivity.

However,the bulk ionic conductivity was never seen to be higher than that in LATP.

Arbi et al.11 studied LATP (0.0 ≤ x ≤ 0.7) using 7Li, 27Al and 31P MASNMR and suggested a few important structure models.

They claimed thedifferent P-sites are of the type P(OTi)4−n(OAl)n, where n varies from 0 to4.These sites change their number density according to the extent of Al substitution, and their overlapped 31P MAS NMR signals (in the range from -20to -30 ppm) provide different asymmetries.

 The authors of Ref.11 observeda gradual increase of the tetrahedral 27Al signal (≈ 40 ppm) intensity withthe increase of x from 0.0 to 0.7. In addition, for LATP with x = 0.5 and0.7, there was a new species of octahedral Al centered at around -17 ppm.

From 7Li NMR, they concluded that when the value of x is above 0.2, theLi4P2O7 phase appears and causes the decrease in ionic conductivity.

Fromconductivity measurements, the authors estimated grain interior activationenergies in the range between 0.27 eV and 0.35 eV.

Furthermore, they also reported severalhigh-temperature structural changes in LATP, observed with NMR, above770 K.

In the present work, we carried out solid-state NMR characterizationof different LATP compositions (with x = 0.0, 0.2, 0.35, 0.5, 0.7 and 1.0)synthesized by solid-state reaction.

We have also done ion dynamics studieson all the compositions using 7Li NMR spin-lattice relaxation (SLR) time(T1ρ) measurements in the rotating frame as well as by 6Li NMR exchangespectroscopy.

 Activation energies for the ionic jump process have been estimated along with the jump rates at various temperatures.

The present workshows how the combined utilization of a variety of NMR techniques to studyboth structure and dynamics of ion conductors at different compositions canhelp to optimize the properties of an important potential solid electrolytesystem.

Solid-state NMR methods have been used to characterize structure and dynamics in an ionic conductor, Li1+xAlxTi2−x(PO4)3 (0.0 ≤ x ≤ 1.0).

MASNMR provided high-resolution 6Li, 7Li, 27Al, 31P spectra of the samplesdiffering in cation concentrations.

The site assignments were done usingthe multinuclear NMR data.

The coalescence of the 7Li indicated fast ionicmotion even at ambient conditions.

The faster ionic motion in the case ofLATP with x = 0.35 when compared to that for x = 0.0 can be seen fromthe 7Li motional narrowing data.

 This was also proven by 7Li relaxometry experiments.

The SLR rates showed diffusion-induced maxima at verylow temperatures when 0.35 ≤ x ≤ 0.5, indicating a faster Li ionic motionfor them in the LATP series.

The activation barriers for the pure-phaseLATP systems were in the range between 0.29 and 0.37 eV.

With the helpof different solid-state NMR methods, the ionic mobility landscape of LATPas a function of ionic composition and temperature can be visualized.

Avacancy migration model for the ionic transport is proposed in the LATPsystem prepared using solid-state reaction.

Li exchange spectroscopy provided hints of slowly moving Li ions in additional phosphate phases formedat the expence of LATP when x is above 0.5.In short, a variety of solidstate NMR techniques were exploited to analyze a series of ion conductors toexplore the most favorable mobility characteristics.

However, the structuralfeatures and hence the ion dynamics of the LATP system show a strongdependence on the preparation method, as understood from the comparisonwith previous reports.

