In this work, the optimum manufacturing condition was investigated for the granuletype cathodes used in low temperature sodium-metal chloride batteries using NaSICON(Na1+xZr2SixP3-xO12) solid electrolytes.

The granule-type cathodes with different shapes,pore sizes and tap densities were obtained by controlling operation parameters ofgranulator such as roll speed and pressure.

From standard cell tests at 195 oC using fourgranule-type cathodes, the optimum roll speed (1.5 rpm) was sorted to produce stablegranule-type cathodes for efficient electrochemical performance.

From thecharacterization of granules and the battery tests, it was revealed that the polygon-typegranules (A, C) produced at an adequate roll speed (1.5 rpm) enable favorable batteryperformances even at high current density of 50 mA/cm2for 200 cycles.

The mainadvantages of A and C granule-type cathodes seem to come from the stable metalconnection among the granules that attribute to the favorable morphology (polygon) andhomogeneous green compacts.

The relatively more efficient cathode kinetics wereobserved for the A sample manufactured at higher roll pressure (10 MPa) comparedwith the C sample (1.2 MPa), which supported the importance of roll pressure inoptimizing the microscopic properties inside the granules (pore size distribution, greendensity, metal connectivity, etc.) for positive cathode kinetics.

Sodium-metal chloride battery (Zebra battery) is a promising candidate for gridenergy storage and electric vehicle applications due to its high energy density, highdurability and zero self-discharge [1-6].

Although the Zebra battery is already precommercialized by FIAMM SoNick and General Electric, many researchers are stillinvestigating advanced technologies for enhanced performance, long-term durabilityand cost competiveness [7-10].

The low temperature operation (below 200 oC) of Zebra battery is fairly attractiveto obtain longer life cycle and low-cost construction materials (sealant, metal parts) [8,11].

To get appropriate battery performances at low temperature below 200 oC,significant efforts should be focused on reducing internal resistance contributed by thesolid electrolyte, negative/positive electrodes and metal current collector parts.

Inparticular, NaSICON (Na1+xZr2SixP3-xO12) materials have attracted significant interestsas a promising solid electrolyte for low temperature sodium rechargeable batteries dueto its high ionic conductivity of 0.15~0.2 S/cm-1 at 200 oC which are comparable to thatβ”-Alumina at 260 oC [3].

In addition to the preliminary reports that reveal the highstability of NaSICON in molten sodium and molten salt electrolyte [12-14], theresearchers recently reported the low temperature Zebra battery using NaSICON whichare successfully operational at 195 oC [15].

To get further improvement in cell performance, thorough investigations arenecessary in cathode development to get an optimum composition, microstructure andgeometry.

Zebra battery is typically fabricated in a discharge state and the initialcathode material is composed of transition metal chlorides and excess metals.

There area few literature reports regarding cathode development which deal with the compositioncontrol [4, 16-18] and manufacturing conditions [4, 19-21].

Although cathode materialsfor Zebra batteries can be prepared by various processes to have diverse shapes andmicrostructures, the major commercial players have focused on developing granule-typecathodes due to their advantages in manufacturing simplicity and cost [4, 8, 16, 19, 20].

Roll compaction is a proven dry-granulation process in pharmaceutical industry forproducing fine powders in order to improve the fluidity and homogeneity of powdermixture, so that it can be handled easily [22].

In Zebra battery industry, this rollcompaction seems to be advantageous in manufacturing high capacity cells by simplyfilling them in the cathode volume through a small hole.

Furthermore, another benefit ofthe granule-type cathodes is fabrication of Zebra cells with diverse shapes regardless ofcell design due to its high fluidity.

However, no publications and patents were reportedso far to explain the manufacturing processes of granule-type cathodes used in Zebrabattery.

In this work, the researchers have studied to find out key parameters to manufacturehigh-quality cathode-type granules using a dry roll compaction method that enables theoptimal electrochemical performance of Zebra battery at 195 oC.

The roll compactionconditions were controlled as key influential parameters which determine the size, shapeand pore structure of the granules.

The optimum processing condition for the granuletype cathodes was discussed considering electrochemical performance in unique celltests with a self-developed Zebra cell configuration with NaSICON solid electrolytemembrane.

The long-term performances of the cells using stable granule-type cathodeswere evaluated with the consideration of cathode characteristics and NaSICON stability.

The manufacturing parameters were controlled to determine the optimumprocessing condition of NaCl-Ni cathode granules for sodium-metal chloride batteries.

It was discovered that the optimum roll speed and pressure were essential to producestable granule-type cathodes for efficient electrochemical performance.

The high rollspeed (2.5 rpm) was revealed to produce thin and fragile granules (B, D) causing adramatic increase of ohmic cell resistance.

The rise of ohmic resistance in cathodes isexplained by the poor electronic conduction among granules due to the insufficientmetal connection caused by plate-type granule morphology.

The cells using A and Cgranule-type cathodes manufactured at roll speed of 1.5 rpm exhibited potential batteryperformances even at high current density of 50 mA/cm2for 200 cycles withoutobservable cell degradation.

The relatively more efficient cathode kinetics of sample Acompared with those of sample C may be due to higher roll pressure (10 MPa) whichenables the facile electrochemical reactions inside granules.
