LiZr2(PO4)3 (LZP) belongs to NASICON family of compounds whose ionic conductivity can betuned by substitution of different cations or by increasing temperature or pressure.

Besides itsconductivity, thermal and electrochemical stability makes it useful as a cathode material forlithium-ion energy storage devices.

Temperature dependent Raman spectroscopic studies werecarried out on the monoclinic (β') phase of LZP in the temperature range 298 – 853K.

Areversible structural phase transition driven by disorder in lithium sites is observed at 603 K.

Thespectral data enable an understanding of dynamics of the mobile Li ion and PO4 internal modesacross the orthorhombic structural phase transition.

On the basis of these studies, a reportedchange in the conductivity around 600 K is explained.

High pressure Raman spectroscopicmeasurements on β'- LiZr2(PO4)3 reveal onset of a structural phase transformation at 3.8 GPa andamorphization above 10 GPa.

On decompression from 26 GPa, the amorphous phase remainsunchanged indicating irreversible nature of pressure induced amorphization.

Three lowfrequency Raman modes at 100, 124 and 144 cm-1 which soften with increase in pressure couldbe the driving force for the phase transition at 3.8 GPa.

Pressure induced phase transition prior toamorphization in β'-LiZr2(PO4)3 could be due to collapse of Zr-O-P bond angles.

Pressureinduced amorphization in this compound might be due to kinetic hindrance of equilibriumdecomposition.

The great demand for solid electrolytes and batteries with high power and energy densitiespromotes the need for advanced lithium superionic conductors and lithium air batterytechnologies.

Among lithium compounds, lithium nitride has the highest ionic conductivity(6×10-3 S cm-1 at room temperature) of potential solid electrolytes.

Despite its high ionicconductivity, its low electrochemical decomposition potential prevents it from being used forpractical applications.

 Within the large family of ionic conductors, NASICON-relatedLiZr2(PO4)3 is known to exhibit a complex polymorphic behavior at ambient conditions andsuperionic conductivity at high temperature.

 Due to its thermal stability, low cost andcompetitive energy densities, it is considered to be an alternative to the commercially dominatingLiCoO2 cathode.

It exhibits anisotropic low thermal expansion by contraction along the a-axisand expansion along the c-axis.

LiZr2(PO4)3 could either be in a monoclinic (β')3 or a triclinic (α')6 crystal structure at roomtemperature, depending on sintering temperatures.

In the β' structure, a complex framework isformed by corner sharing PO4 tetrahedra and ZrO6 octahedra with interstitial lithium atom in afully ordered tetrahedral surrounding.

Temperature variation of conductivity for β'- LiZr2(PO4)3was reported by Sudreau et al.

 The ionic conductivity for the β' phase at ambient temperature isfound to be 10-10 S cm-1.7 Monoclinic LiZr2(PO4)3(β') shows a lower conductivity at roomtemperature and a gain of activation energy above 573 K.

Lower conductivity in β'-LiZr2(PO4)3 is due to low mobility of Li+ion, as there are no empty neighboring sites availablefor hopping.

Conductivity significantly increases with a huge jump of activation energy aboveorthorhombic structural (β) phase transition temperature of 573 K.

The conductivity for βLiZr2(PO4)3 is observed to be 5×10-4 S cm-1.Higher conductivity in disordered β phase isexplained to be due to partially occupied Li sites which produce a low energy barrier for Li+ionsjumping between two independent Li1 and Li2 sites.

To understand the relationship betweenconductivity and LZP structure, a detailed microscopic investigation on ionic conductivity andphase transformation is required.

Structural characterization of lithium transition metal phosphates has been studied throughvarious techniques such as Mossbauer spectroscopy, Li7magic angle spinning nuclear magneticresonance, and optical spectroscopy.

 High pressure resistivity measurements on LISICONcompounds like Li16-2xZnx(GeO4)4 (x=1,2) and Li3+yGeyV1-yO4 (y=0.25, 0.6 and 0.72) showedresistivity maxima at pressures between 2 to 3 GPa and decrease with further rise in pressures.

The decrease in resistivity at high pressures is speculated to be due to the occurrence of a phasetransition but phase transition was not established in these studies.

A systematic study of phasetransformations including amorphization if any, as a function of pressure both on compressionand decompression for prototypic β'- LiZr2(PO4)3 is thus warranted.

If the transition isreversible, there is a need to modify the structure through chemical methods to mimic highpressure behavior resulting in the much desired higher conductivity near room temperature.

Diffraction methods identify materials only with long range order, whereas Raman spectroscopyallows for the investigation of local phase inhomogeneities, structural order/disorder andamorphous materials.

To probe structural changes at the level of chemical bonds, anunderstanding of vibrational modes of β'- LiZr2(PO4)3 through Raman spectroscopy is required.

In present study, Raman spectroscopic studies in the temperature range 80-850 K are carried outto probe the dynamics of the PO4 tetrahedra around the phase transition by studying the internalmodes of PO4 tetrahedra and their line shapes.

High pressure Raman measurements on β'-LiZr2(PO4)3 are carried out up to 20 GPa in both increasing and decreasing pressure cycles toinvestigate the structural stability at high pressures.

