Ca0.5Zr2(PO4)3 and Ca0.45Eu0.05Zr2(PO4)3 nanophosphors have been synthesized by a sol–gelprocess under acid and basic conditions.

In order to achieve the reduction of Eu3+ to Eu2+,europium-doped samples were treated in a reducing atmosphere flow.

The effects of thedifferent synthesis conditions and the partial substitution of calcium by europium ions onthe structure of the samples were analyzed by x-ray diffraction (XRD) transmission electronmicroscopy (TEM) and micro-Raman spectroscopy.

Luminescence and magnetic propertieswere investigated by photoluminescence (PL) spectroscopy and magnetic susceptibilitymeasurements.

XRD patterns can be indexed to a rhombohedral symmetry of space groupR-3 with Z = 6, consistent with a NASICON-type structure.

A higher crystallinity was foundin the samples prepared under basic conditions.

TEM images of all the synthesized samplesshow spherically shaped particles.

A broadening of the Raman bands as a result of nonequivalent vibrations of the orthophosphate groups is observed for samples prepared underacid conditions.

The same effect was found when calcium is substituted by europium into theCa0.5Zr2(PO4)3 host.

PL spectra exhibit strong emission in the blue-green spectral range dueto Eu2+ 4f65d1-4f7transitions and no evidence of Eu3+ emission.

Magnetic measurementsconfirm the 2+ oxidation state of europium ions in all samples.

The synthesis of luminescent materials with a suitable excitation range, high quantum yield, chemical stability and lowthermal quenching is an increasingly active research field.

This interest mainly arises from the problem of global energydemand.

Solid-state lighting (SSL) based on rare earths havebecome a promising alternative to conventional incandescentand fluorescent lamps for illumination [1–4].

These materialsoffer a high light output with low energy consumption [5,6].

Currently, the development of this technology is focusedtoward phosphors exhibiting desirable color emission of highefficiency under UV excitation [7].

Over the years, obtainingwhite light based on the combination of different phosphorsemitting in the red, green and blue ranges of the visible spectrum has been a challenging task [8, 9].

Phosphors emitting inthe red and green ranges of the visible spectrum are rather wellknown, while those providing blue emission have been investigated to a lesser extent.

Some studies have determined thatunder UV excitation the emission spectrum of Eu2+ cations iscentered in the blue range of the visible spectrum.

This emission is generally attributed to 4f65d1-4f7electronic transitions.

However, it has also been reported that, depending on the hostand the environment of the Eu2+ cations, the emission can bemodified to greenish or purplish [10–12].

In this regard, recentstudies have been focused on the study of the optical properties of different materials such as (Ca/Sr/Ba)2SiO4: Eu2+,CsMBr3: Eu2+ (with M = Mg, Ca, Sr) or CaAl2O4: Eu2+,Nd3+ [13–15].

M0.5Zr2(PO4)3 orthophosphates with M = Ca2+, Sr2+ andBa2+, crystallize in a NASICON-type structure [7, 16].

Dueto the versatility of this matrix, these compounds have beenwidely investigated as ionic conductors [17], low thermalexpansion ceramics [18] or luminescent materials [19].

Infact, alkaline earth metals phosphates doped with Eu2+ arealso studied because of their interesting luminescence emission based on M2+ replacement by Eu2+ cations [16].

Inthese cases, a partial inhibition of the luminescence emission or quenching occurs, which has been attributed to aslight displacement between the ground and excited states[7].

When this gap is reduced, it is possible to obtain highefficiency luminescent phosphors useful for laser devices andoptical materials under UV excitation [20].

As it is also thecase for other stoichiometries, the final optical properties ofEu2+-doped M0.5−xEuxZr2(PO4)3 phosphors will depend onthe size and shape [21, 22] of their constituent particles [23].

Traditional methods such as solid state reactions [16] or coprecipitation techniques [7] have been described in order toobtain M0.5−xEuxZr2(PO4)3 as single phases.

However, thedevelopment of new sol-gel processes currently enables thesynthesis of samples with more uniform morphologies andmuch smaller particle sizes.

Such processes have been alreadytested for the synthesis of compounds with similar stoichiometries but doped with cations other than Eu2+ [24].

In thepresent work, we describe the synthesis of Ca0.5Zr2(PO4)3 andCa0.45Eu0.05Zr2(PO4)3 samples by a sol-gel process under acidand basic conditions.

The effects of different synthesis conditions and the partial substitution of calcium by europium ionson the spectral distribution and intensity of the photoluminescence (PL) emission have been assessed.

These luminescenceproperties have been correlated with the morphology, crystalstructure, optical and magnetic properties of the synthesizedsamples.

Ca0.5Zr2(PO4)3 and Ca0.45Eu0.05Zr2(PO4)3 nanopowders weresynthesized by a sol-gel method under acid and basic conditions.

In order to achieve the complete reduction of Eu3+ toEu2+, Eu-doped samples were prepared in a reducing atmosphere following two different treatments.

In general, XRDpatterns of the synthesized samples reveal the formation ofsingle crystalline phases with NASICON-type structure.

Ahigher crystallinity is observed in samples obtained at basicpH.

TEM micrographs of the nanopowders show sphericalparticles in different degrees of agglomeration.

Partial substitution of calcium by europium causes a slight structural distortion, evidenced by a broadening of the Raman peaks as aresult of non-equivalency vibrations of phosphate groups.

PLspectra exhibit a strong emission in the blue–green region ofthe visible spectrum due to Eu2+ 4f65d1-4f7transitions and noevidence of Eu3+ emission.

Magnetic measurements confirmthe 2+ oxidation state of europium ions in these samples.

Inthe present work, we describe the synthesis of Ca0.5Zr2(PO4)3and Ca0.45Eu0.05Zr2(PO4)3 samples by a sol-gel process underacid and basic conditions.

The effects of the different synthesisconditions and the partial substitution of calcium by europiumions on the morphology, crystal structure, optical and magnetic properties of the samples have been investigated.

