A three-dimensionally well-ordered NASICON-type Mg2þ cation conductor, (MgxHf1x)4/(42x)Nb(PO4)3,was firstly developed by partial substitution of lower valent Mg2þ cation onto the Hf4þ sites in a HfNb(PO4)3 solid to realize high Mg2þ cation conductivity even at moderate temperatures.

Due to the formation of well-ordered NASICON-type structure, both the high Mg2þ cation conductivity below 450 °Cand the low activation energy for Mg2þ cation migration was successfully realized for the (Mg0.1Hf0.9)4/3.8Nb(PO4)3 solid.

 Pure Mg2þ cation conduction in the NASICON-type (Mg0.1Hf0.9)4/3.8Nb(PO4)3 solid wasdirectly and quantitatively demonstrated by means of two kinds of dc electrolysis.

Solid electrolytes are functional materials where single ionspecies generally migrate into the solid lattice as a charge carrier,which is quite different from liquid electrolyte solutions wherecations and anions are simultaneously conducted.

Based on suchunique selective ion migration, solid electrolytes are applied tovarious electrochemical devices, such as rechargeable batteriesand chemical sensors.

The conduction of various ions with valence states frommonovalent to tetravalent has been observed in rigid crystal lattices; however, the ion conductivity is significantly dependent onthe valence state and ionic size, i.e., lower valent or smaller sizedions can migrate in solids more readily than higher valent or largersized ions.

As a result, many researchers have paid an attention tothe development of monovalent cation conductors, such as Liþand Naþ conductors, to realize high-performance electrochemicaldevices in the 20th centuries.

In the 21st century, there has been astrong demand for high-performance rechargeable batteries withhigh energy density, so that divalent cation conducting solidelectrolytes have attracted much attention.

Among them, Mg2þcation conductors are believed to be suitable candidates for theelectrolyte of next-generation batteries [1] due to advantages suchas safety and low cost compared to the conventional Li-ion battery.

However, most of the research on Mg2þ ion batteries has employed liquid or polymer electrolytes [2–4].

Consideration offeatures such as energy density, safety, and ease of fabricationconcerns indicate that it is better to fabricate an all-solid-statebattery with a Mg2þ cation conducting solid electrolyte.

Until now, there are few reports on Mg2þ cation conduction incrystalline solids [5–9].

Among them, MgZr4(PO4)6 [5–8] with theβ-Fe2(SO4)3-type structure (monoclinic symmetry, P21/n), which isknown to have a three-dimensional network linking ZrO6 octahedra and PO4 tetrahedra by corner-sharing, has been reported toexhibit high Mg2þ cation conductivity (1.4  103 S cm1 at800 °C), although its activation energy for Mg2þ ion conductionwas extremely high (96–110 kJ mol1).

Furthermore, improvement of the Mg2þ ion conductivity in the β-Fe2(SO4)3-typeMgZr4(PO4)6 crystal structure was reported by the introduction ofpentavalent Nb5þ cations to form the Mg0.7(Zr0.85Nb0.15)4P6O24solid [10].

 Although the Mg0.7(Zr0.85Nb0.15)4P6O24 solid possessed aMg2þ cation conductivity of 7.7  104 S cm1 at 600 °C, whichwas ca times higher than that of MgZr4(PO4)6, the activationenergy for Mg2þ cation migration was still high (92.0 kJ mol1),and therefore, its Mg2þ cation conductivity at lower temperatureswas significantly reduced, which was attributed to the distortionbehavior of the β-Fe2(SO4)3-type structure.

Therefore, to obtain high Mg2þ cation conductivity even atmoderate temperatures around 300 °C, we must select a moresuitable structure for Mg2þ cation migration, such as the NASICON(Naþ super ionic conductor [11])-type structure (rhombohedralsymmetry with hexagonal setting, R3c), which is also a threedimensional network structure similar to the β-Fe2(SO4)3-typestructure.

Although the arrangement of Zr2P3O18 (lantern) units inthe β-Fe2(SO4)3-type structure are distorted, the lantern units inthe NASICON-type structure are well ordered.

This provides anordered ion conduction pathway surrounded by lantern units inthe NASICON-type structure, so that smooth ion migration is expected with this NASICON-type structure, i.e., high ion conductivity is expected even at moderate temperatures of 300–500 °C due to lowering of the activation energy for ion migration.

However, most of the solids that were synthesized at high temperature in an attempt to form the NASICON-type structure wereobtained as β-Fe2(SO4)3-type solids, which is speculated to be dueto the small ionic radius of Mg2þ, so that the ordered NASICONtype crystal structure is not formed.

In the work reported here, we firstly succeeded to develop aseries of NASICON-type Mg2þ cation conductors, (MgxHf1x)4/(42x)Nb(PO4)3, by selecting HfNb(PO4)3 as the mother solid (HfNb(PO4)3 has been reported as a tetravalent Hf4þ cation conductor[12]), of which the lattice size is small compared to other NASICON-type solids, and we report its high Mg2þ cation conductivityat moderate temperatures.

We have firstly developed a three-dimensionally well-orderedNASICON-type Mg2þ cation conductor by partial substitution oflower valent Mg2þ cation onto the Hf4þ sites in the HfNb(PO4)3solid to realize high Mg2þ cation conductivity below 450 °C.

Inaddition, Since the activation energy for Mg2þ cation migrationwas considerably reduced by the formation of a well-orderedcrystal structure compared to the conventionally reported Mg2þcation conductors, we expect that further improvement in theMg2þ cation conductivity of this solid electrolyte for practicalapplication at moderate temperatures around 300 °C or below willbe achieved in the near future.

