LiNi0.6Mn0.2Co0.2O2 (C622) is one of the Ni-rich layer-structured cathode materials with a high capacity,but it suffers from a poor cycling stability and rate capability.

 In this study, Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3 (LATP), aNASICON-type lithium-conductor, is coated on C622 by a solegel process to overcome the shortcomingsof C622. We find that a 0.5 wt% coating of LATP on C622 significantly improves the cell performanceincluding the discharge capacity, rate capability, and cycling stability.

The pristine and LATP-coatedsamples were analyzed using X-ray diffraction (XRD), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), and energydispersive spectroscopy (EDS).

In addition, various electrochemical analyses such as cyclic-voltammetry(CV), galvanostatic intermittent titration technique (GITT), and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy(EIS) are conducted to determine the reason for the improvement of the cell performance.

The cell performance of C622 is enhanced by a coating amount of less than 1.0 wt% and the overallperformance degrades with the increase of the coating amount.

The electrochemical analyses reveal thata high lithium-ion diffusion coefficient and a low interfacial resistance are the reasons for the improvedcell performance; however, our study demonstrates that an excessive coating may degrade the cellperformance, thereby acting as a barrier against the movement of lithium ions.

An increasing demand for lithium rechargeable batteries withhigh energy and power capabilities has emerged as the market forthe battery type continues to expand from the mobile IT-devicemarket to other segments including vehicles such as xEVs andenergy storage systems that require large-format batteries;accordingly, electrode materials with high-energy and powerdensity attributes are required.

Major attention has been directetoward LiNiO2-based or Ni-rich cathode materials [Li(NixCoyMn1-xy)O2, x > 0.5] with high contents of nickel due to the higher capacity,lower cost, and enhanced safety compared to LiCoO2 [1,2].

Thesematerials are, however, beset with several shortcomings includinga poor rate capability and thermal instability, while numerousstudies have been conducted to overcome these problems [3e5].

The substitution of alien elements to suppress the transformationof the crystal structure or surface modifications, so that the interfacial reaction between the electrode and electrolyte are controlledand the contact between them is minimized, can be listed as themajor initiative to alleviate the previously mentioned problems.

There have been several studies on the correlation to the structureproperty relationship of layered cathode materials such as thelithium-rich or nickel-rich one [6e8].

Yue et al.reported on enhancing the rate capability of C622 bysurface modification with reduced graphene oxide [9].

LATP(Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3) coating has been applied to LiMn2O4 and it hasproven to be effective for the improvement of the cycling stabilityat high temperatures [10].

A similar approach was tried for LiCoO2and it resulted in a high discharge capacity and a sound cyclingstability due to the electrode/electrolyte interfacial resistance [11];however, there remains a dearth of the studies that have investigated the effects of the LATP coating on NMC-based cathode materials (LiNixMnyCo1-x-yO2).

In this study, an LATP coating was applied on the promising Nirich layered cathode material C622 using a solegel process as partof a series of studies on coating technologies wherein solid electrolytes were used to improve the rate capability and cycling stability.

LATP is known as one of the materials with a high ionicconductivity of approximately ~103 S/cm under an ambient temperature.

In spite of its high conductivity, though, LATP is notpractically used as a solid electrolyte due to its significant electronicconductivity, which may cause a cell leakage current; moreover,LATP is engaged in electrochemical reactions at around 2.5 V vs.


These drawbacks, however, may not matter when the LATPis applied as a material for the surface coating of the C622-cathodematerials because the operating voltage of the cathode is muchhigher than the potential range.

We therefore investigated thepossibility of using LATP as a coating material for C622 in this study.

C622 was coated by LATP, one of the effective lithium-ion conductors, to improve the cell performance with a strategy ofenhancing the lithium-ion movement at the interface of the electrode and stabilizing the electrode from an electrolyte attack.

As aresult, the discharge capacity of C622 was increased by approximately 12 mA h/g at a 0.1 C-rate; furthermore, the cycling stabilitywas also improved, whereby 98% of the capacity retention wasexhibited after 100 cycles at a 0.5 wt% coating amount.

The capacityfading of C622L-0.5 is greatly reduced at a high current density;however, it was revealed that an increase of the coating amountresults in a degradation of the cell performance.

The Liþ-diffusioncoefficient, anodic, and cathodic reaction behaviors and interfacialresistances were measured using the GITT, CV, and EIS analyses,respectively, and the enhancement of the cell performances and thecoating-amount trend were interpreted with these data.

A high Liþdiffusion coefficient and low interfacial resistance should thereforebe the reasons for the higher capacity, improved rate capability, andenhanced cycling stability of the C622L-0.5 compared with thepristine sample.

