AZr2(PO4)3 (A = Na, K, Rb, Cs) are a set of framework structured compounds that exhibit tunable ultralow thermal expansion over the wide temperature range of 293–1273 K.

We report a systematic Raman spectroscopic investigation on AZr2(PO4)3 (A = K, Rb and Cs) compounds as a function of temperature in the range 80–860 K andpressures of up to 32 GPa.

To get insight into the thermal expansion property, phonon anharmonicity has beeninvestigated by studying the temperature and pressure dependence of Raman peak shifts and line widths andcomputed bulk modulus.

We have compared the phase transition and amorphization pressures of the variousmembers of AZr2(PO4)3 to account for the stability of the ambient rhombohedral phase.

We find that unlikemost of the anomalous thermal expansion materials, in AZr2(PO4)3 (A = K, Rb and Cs), the phonons that areanharmonic with temperature do not necessarily exhibit anharmonicity with pressure.

Negative thermal expansion (NTE) materials are of interest for fundamental research and they are also important for technological applications such as synthesis of materials with controlled thermalexpansion [1,2].

Formation of specific composites with NTE materialscan result in materials with desired thermal expansion for device components; however prolonged exposure of such a composite to extremetemperatures may result in development of micro cracks [3].

Most of theNTE compounds undergo pressure induced structural instability whichlimit their technological applications.

For example ZrW2O8 with alarge isotropic negative thermal expansion coefficient over a widerrange of temperature exhibits an irreversible structural phase transformation at 0.3 GPa followed by amorphization at 2.2 GPa [4].

 Zn(CN)2 undergoes a cubic–orthorhombic phase transformation around 1.3 GPaunder hydrostatic conditions [5].

 At ambient temperature, orthorhombic–monoclinic phase transition at 0.3 GPa has been reported in anisotropic Sc2(MO4)3 [6].

Recently, TaVO5 is reported to undergo structuralphase transition at 0.2 GPa [7].

NaZr2(PO4)3 (NZP) family of compounds have been extensively investigated in recent years due to their remarkable property of ultralowthermal expansion [8].

In NaZr2(PO4)3 substitution of Na by K, Rb and Csdoes not change the parent rhombohedral structure of space group R-3c[9].

 Fig.1 shows the crystal structure of AZr2(PO4)3 (A = Na, K, Rb, Cs)with corner sharing PO4 tetrahedra and ZrO6 octahedra forming athree dimensional network [10].

Each phosphate group is on a twofoldaxis and is linked to four ZrO6 octahedra.

ZrO6 octahedra lie on threefoldaxes and are each linked to six PO4 tetrahedra.

The alkali cations (Na, K,Rb and Cs) are located at sites between the ZrO6 octahedra along theO3ZrO3(A)O3ZrO3 chain [10].

Thermal expansion coefficients can betuned by substitution of interstitial cations of different sizes [11].

NaZr2(PO4)3 (NZP), KZr2(PO4)3 (KZP), RbZr2(PO4)3 (RbZP) andCsZr2(PO4)3 (CsZP) exhibit overall thermal expansion coefficients ofαav ≈ 4.5 × 10−6 K−1, −0.4 × 10−6 K−1, −0.36 × 10−6 K−1 and0.4 × 10−6 K−1 respectively from 293 to 1273 K [9].

On substitutionof larger cations, thermal expansion coefficients become larger alongthe a-axis and shorter along the c-axis due to the bridging of PO4 tetrahedra [11].

Hence, thermal expansion anisotropy is observed to decrease when larger cations are substituted in place of smaller cations[11].

NZP can also serve as a host for nuclear waste immobilizationsince it has the ability to accommodate most of the radioactive ions(Li+, Cu+, Ag+, Tl+, Ba+2, Cu+2, NH4+, etc.

) at the interstitial Na sites[12].

 NZP compounds are highly resistant to thermal shock and find applications in the manufacturing of electronic devices, heat engine components, catalyst supports in automobile industry, etc.


Besidestheir applications, there is considerable interest in understanding pressure induced amorphization in these materials, and the microscopic origin of ultralow thermal expansion by studying anharmonicity andsoftening of phonon modes [1,2,14,15].

In the work of Tarte et al., Raman and IR spectra of rhombohedralNZP compounds at ambient conditions were discussed and relationshipbetween the vibrational properties and chemical composition were explained [16].

Temperature and pressure dependent Raman spectroscopic and first principles computational studies on prototypic NaZr2(PO4)3have provided valuable insight into the role of the various phononmodes to anisotropic thermal expansion [17].

Alkali cation substitutedNZP compounds are known to be stable up to 1273 K [18].

On theother hand, there are not many reports on the behavior of NZP familywith respect to pressure: prototypic NZP undergoes structural phasetransformations around 5 and 6 GPa maintaining structural integrityup to 32 GPa [19].

In the present work the influence of temperatureand pressure on the phase stability of alkali cation substituted NZP compounds are investigated.

Raman shifts originate from the polarizability of chemical bonds andhence Raman spectroscopy is helpful in probing structural changes atthe level of chemical bonds.

In situ Raman spectroscopy study at hightemperature and pressure is a convenient method to compare the phasestability of compounds of NZP family.

 Study of anharmonicity due to phonon scattering in a solid is important to explain their thermal expansion.

The current study is focused on two aspects: (a) to compare and analyze the contribution of the various phonon modes to anisotropic lowthermal expansion with increasing size of alkali cations and (b) to investigate the structural stability of the cation substituted compoundswith pressure.

Raman spectroscopic studies were carried out up to30 GPa at ambient temperature and from 80 to 860 K at ambient pressure to identify anharmonic phonons.

Raman spectra were measured on AZr2(PO4)3, A = Na, K, Rb, Cs attemperatures to 860 K and pressures up to 25 GPa.

Phase stability ofthese compounds at high pressure is discussed with respect to phasetransformation and pressure induced amorphization.

The pressure andtemperature dependence of the Raman peak shifts were used to separate the anharmonic contribution to thermal expansion fromquasiharmonic contribution.

Apart from low frequency translationaland librational modes, several other bending modes of phosphate ionsare found to be strongly anharmonic.

Raman modes above the highpressure phase transition exhibit normal positive pressure coefficientthat would result in positive thermal expansion.

The present findingsrelated to the stability of AZr2(PO4)3, A = K, Rb, Cs at high pressureswill have significant impact on further work to modify the structurethrough substitution of different cations at different positions resultingin a more stable low thermal expansion at high pressure.

