As the world transitions away from fossil fuels, energy storage, especially rechargeable batteries, could have a big role to play. Though rechargeable batteries have dramatically changed the energy landscape, their performance metrics still need to be further enhanced to keep pace with the changing consumer preferences along with the increasing demands from the market. For the most part, advances in battery technology rely on the continuing development of materials science, where the development of high-performance electrode materials helps to expand the world of battery innovation by pushing the limits of performance of existing batteries. This is where vanadium-based compounds (V-compounds) with intriguing properties can ﬁtintoﬁll the gap of the current battery technologies.
The history of experimenting with V-compounds (i.e., vanadium oxides, vanadates, vanadium-based NASICON) in various battery systems, ranging from monovalent-ion to multivalent-ionbatteries, stretches back decades. They are fascinating materials that display rich redox chemistry arising from multiple valency and coordination geometries. Over the years, researchers have made use of the inherent ability of vanadium that undergoes metamorphosis between diﬀerent coordination polyhedra accompanied by transitions in the oxidation state for reversible intercalation/insertion of more than one guest ions without breaking the structure apart. Such inﬁnitely variable properties endow them with a wide range of electronic and crystallographic structures. The former attribute varies from insulators to metallic conductors while the latter feature gives rise to layered structures or 3D open tunnel frameworks that allow facile movement of a wide range of metal cations and guest species along the gallery. Accompanied by a growing stringent requirements for energy storage applications, most V-compounds face diﬃculty in resolving the problems of their own lack competitiveness mostly due to their intrinsically low ionic/electronic conductivity. The key to producing vanadium-based electrodes with the desired performance characteristics is the ability to fabricate and optimize them consistently to realize certain speciﬁcations through eﬀective engineering strategies for property modulation.
In this Account, we aim to provide a comprehensive article that correlates the fundamental of charge storage mechanism to crystallographic forms and design principle for V-compounds. More importantly, the essential roles played by engineering strategies in the property modulation of V-compounds are pinpointed to further explain the rationale behind their anomalous behavior. Apart from that, we further summarize the key theoretical and experimental results of some representative examples for tuning of properties. On the other hand, advances in characterization techniques are now suﬃciently mature that they can be relied upon to understand the reaction mechanism of V-compounds by tracing real-time transformation and structural changes at the atomic scale during their working state. The mechanistic insights covered in this Account could be used as a fundamental guidance for several key strategies in electrode materials design in terms of dimension, morphology, composition, and architecture that govern the rate and degree of chemical reaction.
The future global economy will put unprecedented strain on energy demands under the burden of a rising population that consumes the limited resources in the earth. Electrochemical energy storage, especially rechargeable batteries, has been one of the potential solutions put forward. Over the years, commercial rechargeable batteries have widely penetrated the stationary, portable, and transportation markets by oﬀering a perfect combination of energy/volume density (100−300 Wh kg−1/250−650 Wh L−1), longevity, and aﬀordability. While batteries have laid the foundation for a fossil fuel-free society, building the battery of the future necessitates a new wave of chemistries that are capable of pushing the boundaries of current performances.During our journey working on new battery materials with appealing capacity and energy density, we settled on V-compounds, as they display a wide range of electronic and crystallographic structures arising from the great stability of various oxidation states (from +5 to +2) and coordination environments (Figure 1). For example, V2O5 is known for its multielectron transition that can deliver a high theoretical capacity of 294 mAh g−1 with 2 Li+ (de)intercalation. The highly covalent 3D structure of vanadium phosphates provides enhanced structural and thermal stability even at high charge states. In addition, the inherently high ionic conductivity of Li3V2(PO4)3 (LVP) and Na3V2(PO4)3 (NVP) allows cations to diﬀuse through their interstitial spaces facilely at high average operating voltage of 4.0 V (vs Li/Li+) and 3.4 V (vs Na/Na+) respectively (diﬀusion coeﬃcient: 10−9−10−10 and ~10−14 cm2 s−1 for LVP and NVP, respectively). Apart from that, Li3VO4 is an insertion-type anode with high ionic conductivity (∼10−8 Scm1 at room temperature) at a relatively low voltage range between 0.2 and 1.0 V vs Li/Li+, which can potentially replace the role formerly reserved by graphite and Li4Ti5O12. Nevertheless, the challenges in developing high-performance V-compounds lie in the slow reaction kinetics that arise from their low electronic conductivity. The deﬁciency of being less electronically reactive poses a signiﬁcant barrier for V-compounds to fully claim their theoretical energy and power density. Another major issue of V-compounds is associated with the amphiprotic nature of vanadium, where deleterious interfacial reaction between the electrolyte (strong Lewis acid) and vanadium through acid−base interaction exacerbates its dissolution problem.5 As a result, the catalytic decomposition of the electrolyte can trigger rapid capacity fading due to the loss of active materials. The moderate toxicity of vanadium is one of the concerns that should not be overlooked. It is generally known that the toxicity of vanadium varies with its physicochemical state, where it increases, as a rule, with valence. Despite their great promise, eﬀective engineering strategies are highly sought after to tailor the intrinsic disadvantages of V-compounds.In this Account, we aim to provide a holistic snapshot of the development of V-compounds that correlates the fundamentals of the charge storage mechanism to the design principle of V-compounds. More importantly, we hope to pinpoint the essential role played by engineering strategies in the properties modulation of V-compounds. On top of that, a balanced and facts-based perspective is provided to elucidate the promise and current status of V-compounds, which is helpful in devising strategies for the future batteries.
Thermodynamically, the Nernst equation can also be translated into an expression where the diﬀerence in Li chemical potentials (μLi) between the anode and cathode determines the cell voltage:6
Taking the lithium ion battery (LIB) as an example where the Li reference anode remains a constant value in chemical potential, the chemical potential of interstitial Li in an intercalation compound can be expressed as the derivative of the free energy of the material with respect to Li concentration (x):7
Graphically, the μLi within the intercalation V-compounds can be derived from the slope of the free energy at a particular composition, which establishes a straightforward connection between a measurable voltage curve and the nature of phase transformations with respect to the variations in Li concentration. For example, a single-phase solid solution reaction of LVP gives rise to a smoothly sloping voltage curve.8 In contrast, a ﬁrst-order phase transformation from a Li-poor phase α to a Li-rich phase β leads to a plateau voltage proﬁle in the phase separation region.7 Steps shown in the voltage curve are indicative of a phase separation reaction, where a stable intermediate with lower Gibbs free energy is likely to form over the energetically favorable phase. Our recent research focused on nanosized V-compounds has shown a deviation in the shape of the voltage curve arising from their diﬀerence in the chemical potential along various crystal orientations near the surface due to a change in Gibbs free energy caused by high surface or interface energy. Therefore, a sloping voltage proﬁle is more likely to be observed as the miscibility gap between two local minima is signiﬁcantly reduced with the additional free energy.9,10The thermodynamics expression signiﬁes the large available energy in cells based on the V-compounds at equilibrium condition. However, their theoretical value of chemical energy can seldom be fully claimed due to the presence of overpotential caused by kinetic limitations of the complicated reaction environment. In summary, overpotential (η)is recognized to be the total voltage drop-oﬀ induced by activation polarization, concentration polarization and ohmic polarization:11 Voc and Vt are the open circuit voltage and terminal cell voltage respectively, (ηact)a and (ηact)c are the activation polarization at the anode and cathode,respectively, (ηconc)a and (ηconc)c are the concentration polarization at the anode and cathode respectively, I is the load current, and R is the internal resistance of the cell.The activation polarization is the voltage drop arising from the charge transfer reaction at the electrode/electrolyte interfaces, which can be described using the Butler−Volmer equation to illustrate how the current ﬂow (i) varies with overpotential:12 where i0 = K0FA is the exchange current density, K0 is the reaction rate constant, A is the activity of the reactants, α is the transfer coeﬃcient, T is the temperature in Kelvin, and R is the gas constant. This kinetic hindrance involves the charge transfer at the electrode/electrolyte interfaces, in which the activation barrier on ion mobility within the V-compounds can be strategically minimized if a highly conductive interface for facile electron transfer is provided. The concentration polarization is tied with the rate of ion transportation from the bulk to the surface of the electrode materials:11
where ηc, Es, Eb, Cs, and Cb are the concentration polarization, electrode potential at the surface, electrode potential in the bulk solution, concentration at the electrode surface and the concentration in the bulk solution. Previous ﬁndings associated with property modulation of V-compounds have hinted the possible ways to minimize the concentration polarization by continuously replenishing the electrolyte surface with incoming electrolyte ion from the bulk solution. Therefore, engineering strategies that can successfully address the mass transport issue would be helpful to provide a shorter ion transport pathway toward the V-compounds. The ohmic polarization (ηohm)is associated with the resistances caused by various components of a battery, such as the electrolyte, current collector, additives, and contact between the active materials and the current collector. It is simpliﬁed as internal resistance as follows:11
This is to say, a reduced overpotential can be obtained through the fabrication of self-supported vanadium-based electrodes without employing electro-inert binders.13 The electron transfer process at the electrode/current collector interfaces is not retarded by the insulating binder or the long-rangedistancebetweentheV-compounds andcurrent collector, which is also beneﬁcial for improving the power density of battery.
The key to producing V-compounds with the desired performance characteristics is the ability to fabricate and optimize them consistently to realize certain speciﬁcations for battery applications. At a fundamental level, the engineering strategies that are eﬀective for property modulation are summarized in Figure 2.
The anomalous behavior of nanostructures can be rationalized by Fick’s law ,where a reduced diﬀusion length (L) confers to a shorter ion diﬀusion time (τ). This phenomenon conﬁrms the fact that nanostructuring enables a higher inﬂux of ion across the interface to accelerate the reaction of vanadium-based electrodes. In our attempt to grapple with the intrinsic limitations of V-compounds, the concept of morphological tuning in their nanoform was brought up, where the 0D, 1D, and 2D V-compounds nanostructures are those successful examples.14−17 Furthermore, we found that the pseudocapaci-tive character of V-compounds is increasingly evident when their sizes fall into the nanoregime, which is beneﬁcial for addressing the slow solid-state diﬀusion of intercalating ions.2,10 Given that a large number of charges can be accumulated near the surface within microsecond to milli-second time scales, the reaction taking place in nanostructured electrodes entails signiﬁcant suppression of intercalation induced phase transition, giving rise to better kinetics than that of the typical diﬀusion-controlled faradaic reaction.18 Proceeding under this assumption, we can correlate the unprecedented rate capability to the increasing capacitive-controlled storage mechanism in nanostructured V-com-pounds. Rationally designing V-compounds into nanostruc-tures might help, but a better way comes with the construction of a 3D secondary structure that can preserve the advantageous features of a certain morphology without compromising on the merits of the nanostructure. Our group recognized early that the limitation in mass transport at the interface can be mitigated by the morphological control of nanostructures. With the 3D porous secondary structure, the concentration polarization can be minimized with better electrolyte immersion. Furthermore, a higher reaction rate can be sustained through the 3D continuous electron/ion transport pathways via interconnected nanoscale building blocks and suppression of self-agglomeration and pulverization.4,19,20Kinetics studies have revealed the critical role of the lattice environment that changes the interaction between cation and host materials.21 The introduction of a shielding hydrate layer or intercalation of alkali ions improves the kinetics of ion migration by modulation of the polarity and dimension of the anion framework. In addition to being able to expand the interlayer spacing of layered V-compounds, structural water enhances the mobility of intercalating ions by shielding their charge, as a way to reduce the trapping force endorsed by lattice oxygen. On the other hand, the pillaring eﬀect exerted by the preinserted species further stabilizes the interlayer structure, though their coordination might cause a shrinkage of the lattice beforehand. These concepts have been validated in our recent studies on vanadium-based electrodes.22,23In addition, doping cations introduce defects, such as vacancies and holes, that counteract the imbalance of electrical neutrality in the crystal lattice.24 Therefore, the electronic conductivity can be enhanced with the generation of hole. Given the correlation between ion diﬀusivity and activation energy represented in the classical Arrhenius equation:lattice engineering through ion doping and lattice expansion could also be the method of choice to tune the activation energy of V-compounds. In particular, the larger radius of alkaline ions (Na+ and K+) and higher charge of Zn2+ makes their intercalation more kinetically unfavorable, not to mention their sluggish migration in the lattice structure as compared with Li+. A study reported by Cao and co-workers is particularly interesting as they revealed the central role of chemically inserted cations that enlarges the interlayer spacing by inducing the formation of V4+ species.26 This concept is eventually generalized to other transition metals to tackle the sluggish insertion kinetics of intercalating ions, which provides insightful guidelines for the development of high-performance V-compounds.
Surface engineering improves the structural stability and conductivity by regulating the surface chemistry and chemical response. Conformal carbon coating is particularly common for V-compounds, as it oﬀers multiple advantages in a readily achievable way by employing widely available carbon sources, such as polymers, polysaccharides, and organic acids.27−29 The enhanced electrochemical performances can be explained from the following perspectives: (i) a conductive coating improves the electronic and ionic conductivity; (ii) mechanical conﬁne-ment suppresses severe volume expansion; (iii) a buﬀer layer stabilizes the solid−electrolyte interface (SEI). Further research in our group was devoted to marrying the surface engineering with other strategies for greater impact. With all these delineations in mind, Yao et al. modiﬁed the strategy by making use of ionic liquid as the N-doped carbon source in the synthesis of NVP.30 With a well-protected surface and improved electronic conductivity endowed by the N-doped carbon, the NVP composite exhibits remarkable performance in both long-term cycling and rate tests.The synergistic coupling eﬀect that is induced by the juxtaposition of disparate types of materials provides a viable solution to ameliorating the sluggish kinetics of electronic and ionic transport encountered by most V-compounds. Among various possible combinations, carbon-based scaﬀolds are able to provide highly compatible features with V-compounds to unleash their full potential. For example, V2O5,31 LVP,24 and NVP32 tethered on the surface of carbonaceous materials have endowed them with enhanced electrochemical properties, which can be explained from the following aspects: (i) carbon supports with high conductivity facilitate eﬃcient charge transfer; (ii) severe agglomeration can be prevented; (iii) conﬁnement of carbon maintains the structural integrity of the V-compounds. Apart from that, what makes carbon a versatile support is its high tunability, where it can be transformed into several other forms after the introduction of defects and vacancies induced by doped or absent atoms. These ﬁndings have further sparked the investigation of chemically synthe-sized doped frameworks, biologically derived materials, and organics with intrinsic doping (e.g., polymers and ionic liquids) as conductive scaﬀolds. The modiﬁed carbon is endowed with enhanced surface wettability and favorable binding sites for cations. These unique properties, merged with the fact that carbon materials provide synergistic enhancement in electronic conductivity of the electrode, are a plausible explanation for the improved reaction kinetics.33
The discussions in this section will be directed to our research on vanadium-based electrodes, with an emphasis on the correlation between engineering strategies and their charge storage properties. Their electrochemical characteristics are summarized in Figure 3 for comparison.
4.1.1. Li3V2(PO4)3. Despite the high theoretical capacity (197 mAh g−1 with 3 Li+ insertion/extraction) of LVP, it is limited by the low electronic conductivity (2.4 × 10−7 S cm−1).24,34 In our initial work investigating the Li+ diﬀusion rate of LVP, we discovered the voltage dependent diﬀusion behavior of LVP, where a phase transition region usually causes higher energy barriers for ion diﬀusion compared to the solid solution region. This basic insight about the nature of transformation on the electrochemistry of V-compounds has been an important guidance for future optimization of other intercalation compounds through structural engineering.8 Moreover, the low electronic conductivity issue of LVP can be mitigated in the presence of carbon matrices, which can be either in encapsulation or deposition form, for enhanced charge transfer and stability. For example, the LVP/carbon composite reported by Balducci’s group can sustain high cycling stability up to 10 000 cycles at a high rate of 50 C (Figure 4a,b).35 Similarly, Mai et al.’s study that employed the same strategy focused more on the fabrication of LVP into 3D hierarchical carbon-decorated structures, which led to an insigniﬁcant capacity fading of 0.0065% per cycle at a high rate of 20 C after 4000 cycles (Figure 4c).36 When the nanoporous carbon network was further modiﬁed into a 3D form via a bioinspired method in our previous study, the structural advantages have translated into a boost in several aspects of the performance. For example, the encapsulated LVP can be cycled up to 1000 cycles with almost no obvious capacity fading at 100 C (Figure 4d,e), along with a high energy density of 205 Wh kg−1 at a power density of 41 kW kg−1.374.1.2. Na3V2(PO4)3. Similar to LVP, NASICON-type NVP has a promising theoretical capacity of 117 mAh g−1 (2 Na+ insertion/extraction) but moderate electronic conductivity that is at only slightly higher value of 1.63 × 10−6 Scm1.A common strategy that helps to shorten the diﬀusion length of ion/electron would dictate compositing NVP with conductive matrices to aﬀord better performance. In addition to the conventional wisdom that relies on in situ covalent hybrid-ization of carbon-based materials with NVP, the impact of secondary structure was taken into consideration in our previous studies to allow better accessibility of electrolyte and suppression of volume expansion.38 For example, an extremely stable cycling performance of over 10 000 cycles at 100 C was delivered by the 3D hierarchical porous NVP-based hybrid (Figure 5a,b).1 With the eﬀect of doped carbon being factored in, a pronounced enhancement is also seen for the performance of NVP. For example, a ﬂowerlike N,B codoped carbon-coated NVP composite delivers a low capacity fading rate of 0.40%that can still be maintained after 2000 cycles at 100 C.33 Furthermore, we have seen that tremendous strides have been made for NVP as its performance in full cells is getting closer to that of commercial batteries. For example, the full cell based on 3D graphene capped NVP reported by Cao et al. managed to reach an initial Coulombic eﬃciency as high as 94.3% and sustain a capacity retention of 77.1% over 200 cycles (Figure 5c,d).39
Vanadium oxides cover a wide range of compositions with diﬀerent coordination environments and oxidation states, where V2O5 and VO2(B) are particularly interesting, with their rich intercalation chemistry.Li can be inserted into the layered structure of orthorhombic V2O5 at diﬀerent intercalation depths (V2O5 ↔ LixV2O5), accompanied by a series of phase transitions. Despite its high capacity, the commercialization of V2O5 requires further optimization of dimensional and transport parameters. Nano-structuring has been the pioneering eﬀort to overcome the sluggish reaction kinetics of V2O5 by capitalizing on the beneﬁt  of nanomaterials with rational morphological design.40 Our latest research has extended this concept to the mass production of V2O5 nanostructures, hoping to move that success to industrial applications from an economic standpoint. To achieve this, the ambient dissolution−recrystallization mechanism enables the production of V2O5 nanobelts at room temperature at a large scale.13 From our density functional theory (DFT) calculations, the unusual growth mechanisms of the V2O5 nanobelts along the [010] direction diﬀer vastly from the well-accepted calculations where nonlocal correlations are neglected. The excellent performances of these V2O5 nanobelts in LIBs and sodium ion batteries (SIBs) are what make us believe its possible commercial viability; for example, speciﬁc capacities of 144 and 61 mAh g−1 can be achieved at 20 and 10 C for LIBs and SIBs, respectively. Lately, the knowledge gained for the design principle of V2O5 was further transferred to the application of V2O5 in other battery systems. A V2O5 nanorod constructed 3D porous network that was produced in a large scale has been proved to be electrochemically active toward Zn2+.2 Owing to the unique architecture, this cathode exhibits good performance, sustain-ing a capacity fading rate of 0.033% over 5000 cycles at a high rate of 10 A g−1. From the mechanistic study based on ﬁrst-principles calculations, the possible insights that suggest the most favorable intercalation pathway in the [100] channel for Zn2+ and a slight shrinkage in the lattice caused by the interaction between the incoming Zn2+ and VO6 units with opposite charge may be useful guidelines in materials design for zinc ion batteries (ZIBs) (Figure 6a,b).
Among various polymorphic forms of VO2, monoclinic VO2(B) with a layered structure is of particular interest. With an increased edge-sharing connectivity of VO5 square pyramids, VO2(B) is endowed with better structural stability compared to V2O5 as a result of higher resistance to lattice shearing upon cycling.41 An early study reported by Mai’s group has shown the great potential of nanoscroll buﬀered VO2(B) in LIBs by demonstrating excellent cycling performance that shows 82% capacity retention over 1000 cycles.42 In recent years, the viability of VO2(B) beyond LIBs has led to a renaissance in research of this material. We have seen the deployment of VO2(B) in aqueous-based ZIBs, where the charge storage mechanism highly resembles that of LIBs. It has been identiﬁed by in situ X-ray diﬀraction (XRD) study that both of the tunnels parallel to the b-axis ((−601) and (−404) facets) or c-axis ((020) facet) are the possible transport pathways for Zn2+ (de)intercalation (Figure 6c,d).43 In this study, the VO2(B) nanoﬁbers deliver discharge capacities as high as 232 and 171 mAh g−1 at 50 and 300 C, respectively (Figure 6e). Such promising values can be ascribed to the large transport tunnel of VO2(B) along with its multiple possible transport routes.
Li3VO4 is an insertion type anode with a 3D lantern-like framework that exhibits many possible sites for Li+ insertion and high Li+ mobility in the lattice. A two-electron transition reaction is well-accepted as the intercalation mechanism ofLi3VO4 upon lithiation (theoretical capacity of 394 mAh g−1), despite new perspectives on the insertion of a maximum of 3 mol Li+ emerging as the measured capacity exceeding the theoretical value.44,45 Ongoing research focuses on improving the electronic conductivity of Li3VO4, where several research groups have hybridized and doped Li3VO4 with foreign substances for modulation of properties. For example, along with the highly reversible (de)intercalation reaction observed via the in situ XRD study (Figure 7a), the electrochemical performance of Li3VO4 was further enhanced after modiﬁca-tion with carbonaceous materials.44 The novel insights into the role of hybridization and surface chemistry on the charge storage properties of Li3VO4 were further harnessed for the design of a novel Li3VO4 in our later study.9 The mechanistic study carried out by DFT calculation revealed that Li+ prefers to travel along path 2a rather than path 4a due to the lower energy barrier for diﬀusion (Figure 7b). Moreover, we also attempted to optimize them through carbon coating and the construction of secondary structures. The N-doped carbon-encapsulated Li3VO4 nanowires show excellent power capability, where a capacity of 203 mAh g−1 (55% of the capacity obtained at 1 A g−1) can still be maintained at 20 A g−1. Furthermore, when the carbon-coated Li3VO4 spheres were coupled with a LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4 cathode in a full cell, they exhibits exceptional rate performance, where 63% capacity obtained at 0.2 C can still be retained under a 10-fold increase in current density (Figure 7c).3Layered vanadate, Na2V6O16·3H2O, consisting of Na+ and water molecules sandwiched between V3O8 layers is suitable for facile intercalation of multivalent ions and is highly compatible with aqueous-based electrolytes. We are partic-ularly interested in aqueous-based batteries, owing to their advantages over organic systems in the aspects of cost-eﬀectiveness, safety features, and power density. In fact, our ﬁrst few research works on Na2V6O16·3H2O in aqueous-based ZIBs were motivated by the fast ion transport and better operational feasibility of the aqueous systems, which can be a cost-eﬀective solution for large-scale applications in the long run. Inspired by the study of Mai’s group that unraveled the intercalation mechanism of Zn2+ in Na2V6O16·3H2O,46 we further worked through the sluggish charge transfer kinetics and structural instability of Na2V6O16·3H2O by the nanoscale morphology and pillaring eﬀect of interlayer metal ions as well as structural water.47 These favorable structural features act in concert to enable a good rate and cycling performance. In a full cell developed by Niu’s group, they proved that the NaV3O8· 1.5H2O nanobelts are capable of achieving a high energy density of 300 Wh kg−1, on top of a high capacity retention of 82% after 1000 cycles at 4 A g−1 (Figure 7d).48Conclusions from the aforementioned studies can be extended beyond Na2V6O16. It is possible to identify that structural features, such as a large interlayer spacing, a robust charge transport framework, and accessibility of redox active sites, are the parameters that can be tuned to maximize the performance. This has driven our investigation of NH4V4O10 with ample structural similarity with LiV3O8 for ZIBs.49 When the NH4V4O10 nanobelts with a 3D ﬂowerlike architecture were assembled on a quasi-solid-state ZIB, the cell stabilized at 378 mAh g−1 with almost 100% Coulombic eﬃciency after 50 cycles. Aside from experimental investigations through ex situ techniques, theoretical calculations were also carried to answer those unresolved queries regarding the intercalation mecha-nism of layered Na2V6O16·3H2O. The extended step has established a theory that can be applied to illustrate the working mechanism and predict the performance by taking into consideration the preferential diﬀusion of Zn2+ ions along the [010] direction within the interlayer space.
Tunable electrochemical behaviors accompanied by a rich redox chemistry in V-compounds have made them the focus of interest in various battery systems spanning from monovalent to multivalent-ion batteries, where their electrochemical properties are compared with other conventional materials in Figure 8. However, their viability is still being questioned from the perspective of cost and toxicity. Therefore, further studies are still required to fully understand the toxicology as well as the biological and pharmacological activity of vanadium. In addition, the high cost of vanadium will likely to add up to a hefty production cost that might dictate against their use in large-scale applications. The applicability of V-compounds is also challenged by their slow reaction kinetics arising from the low conductivity. Thus, amelioration of the existing techniques to further modify the intrinsic properties of V-compounds is the missing piece to make them more competitive for commercial applications. In the following paragraph, we highlight some of the research directions, in our opinion, that are essential for the further advancement of vanadium-based electrodes.The conﬂuence of material synthesis, real-time character-izations, and computational simulations will be the way of the future for research of V-compounds. Recent advances in nanotechnology are making V-compounds more synthetically accessible with nanoscale precision. However, careful attention should be directed toward the handling of the complexity of materials design as the disappearance of one disadvantage might be accompanied by several other issues for nano-structured V-compounds (e.g., unwanted parasitic reactions, unstable SEI formation, and severe aggregation). A better understanding of the charge storage and failure mechanisms transforms our ability to design better V-compounds. Never-theless, the central to challenge is that this can barely be resolved by experimental means. What is needed is real-time monitoring platforms capable of providing simultaneous information on the compositional and structural evolutions of V-compounds during battery operation. Under certain circumstances where current characterization techniques are short of being satisfactory to provide adequate resolution to the identiﬁcation of the short-lived intermediates and elucidation of the reaction mechanism at a detailed level, we might need to resort to computational methods, such as DFT calculations and machine learning, to supply the missing information that is inaccessible by experiments.Given the commitment of vanadium-based electrodes, a question arises: What does the future hold for the vanadium-based electrode? We think the potential impact that V-compounds may have on the future of battery technology will be huge, where the ﬁndings may pave the way for innovation in this ﬁeld. However, we do realize that V-compounds still require more advanced designs and strategies to convert this game-changing innovation into a commercially embedded technology, which is the direction that we are keen to work through down the road.