Recently, all-solid-state rechargeable lithium ion batteries (LIBs)with solid electrolytes have attracted a lot of attention due to theirhigh energy density, high safety as well as long cycle performance,which can be applied to some large-scale systems such as electric orhybrid vehicles and smart grids.

The key to the fabrication of highperformance all solid state LIBs is to develop an appropriate solidstate electrolyte, which should possess the following propertiesincluding high lithium ion conductivity, a wide electrochemicalwindow, as well as excellent chemical stability with lithium anodeand Co-, Ni-, or Mn-containing cathodes.

So far, various types oflithium ion conducting solid state electrolytes have been developedand investigated as possible electrolyte candidates for all solid stateLIBS, which mainly include garnet-type Li7La3Zr2O12,1,2 Li2S-basedglass,3-5 NASICON-type LiM2(PO4)3(M =Ti, Ge, Hf, Zr, Sn).

Among the above-mentioned solid state electrolytes, Li7La3Zr2O12and Li2S-based glass have been widely used to fabricate all solidstate LIBS.

However, these two electrolytes still have somedrawbacks.

For Li7La3Zr2O12 electrolyte, the high calcinationtemperature up to 1200 °C is required to obtain the cubic phasewith high lithium ion conductivity.

Under such circumstance, theLa2Zr2O7impurity is easily formed, and thus reduces lithium ionconductivity.

In addition, when Li7La3Zr2O12 sample is exposed tothe humid air, its grain boundary conductivity obviously decreaseddue to the formation of La(OH)3 phase in Li7La3Zr2O12 grainboundaries.

As to Li2S-based glass, it is very instable in air, whichtends to react with the water contained in the air, leading to theformation of harmful H2S gases.

 Compared with the above twoelectrolytes, the NASICON-type LATP solid state electrolyte hassome advantages over them, such as excellent stability in ambientatmosphere, mass production and low cost.

However, the LATPelectrolyte tends to react with lithium anode due to the Ti4+/ Ti3+redox reaction.

The problem for LATP solid electrolyte can be solved by adoptingthe strategy that a barrier layer, which requires sufficient stabilityagainst lithium metal, can be introduced between electrolyte andlithium anode.

The added barrier layer can block the contactsbetween them and prevent the undesired chemical reactions.

Thismethod has been employed to prepare all solid state LIBS with theaim of avoiding the diffusion of elements at theelectrode/electrolyte interface or lowering theelectrode/electrolyte interfacial resistance.

 In the previouswork, the interlayers were prepared using radio-frequency (RF)reactive magnetron sputtering.

Although this technique can be usedto fabricate dense and high performing interlayers, it is expensive,complex and consumes a large amount of energy.

Therefore, it isnot suitable for the mass production.

To significantly lower the cost of production, the dry pressingmethod can be adopted to produce the interlayer for all solid stateLIBS, which is simple, reproducible, and very cost-effective ascompared to vacuum deposition techniques, and it has been widelyapplied to the fabrication of electrolyte membranes and interlayersat the interface of electrolyte/electrode for solid oxide fuel cells.

To the best of our knowledge, there were no reports on thepreparation of protecting layer between LATP electrolyte andlithium anode using the dry pressing method.

In this work, theNasicon-structured LAGP solid electrolyte was chosen as thematerials for the preparation of interlayer, whose lithium ionconductivity can reach over 10-4 S/cm and is slightly lower than thatof LATP sample.

 Importantly, comparable with LATP electrolyte,the LAGP solid state electrolyte is more stable against Li becauseGe4+ is more difficult to be reduced than Ti4+account of the high price for Ge sources, it is not practical to useLAGP directly as solid electrolyte for all solid state LIBS, while as ainterlayer, only a very small amount of LAGP materials is needed,which can reduce the low preparation cost of all solid state LIBS.

Herein, a simple dry pressing and post-calcination process wasemployed to fabricate LATP/LAGP double-layer lithium ion solidstate electrolyte.

The electrical conduction properties, stability inair and chemical stability against Li of LATP/LAGP electrolyte as wellas electrochemical characteristics of Lithium ion battery employingLATP/LAGP as solid state electrolyte were investigated.

In summary, a facile dry pressing and subsequent calcinationprocess has been adopted to prepare the dense, smooth and flatLATP/LAGP bi-layer solid state electrolyte which shows a highelectrical conductivity of 3.4 ×10-4 S/cm at 25 °C as well as anegligible electronic conductivity.

This electrolyte was also found tobe excellent stability in air, with no performance decay afterexposure to air atmosphere for 3 months.

Simultaneously, theLATP/LAGP bi-layer electrolyte is stable in contact with Li mental,which is attributed to good stability of LAGP layer against Li anode.

The LFP cell assembled by LATP/LAGP electrolyte can be normallycharged and discharged at 0.1 C rate.

After 3 charge-dischargecycles, the cell capacity increases to 145.3 mAh/g and 141.1 mAh/g,corresponding to about 85% and 83 % of theoretical capacity.

Theseresults confirms that the LATP/LAGP bi-layer electrolyte can beapplied to all solid state LIBS.

In our future work, we will assembleall solid state LIBS using the above electrolyte and evaluate theirelectrochemical performances.

