We successfully demonstrated the applicability of microcontact impedance spectroscopy (MC IS) on Li+conducting solidelectrolytes and measured the Li+bulk conductivity (σb) of LiTi2(PO4)3 (LTP) and Li1+xAlxTi2-x(PO4)3 (LATP) single crystalsindependent of microstructural effects (e.g., grain boundaries, pores, density).

The crystals had a size of about 100 μm ineach direction and crystallized with NASICON-type structure

Finite element calculations were performed to validatethe impedance data analysis.

 A strong increase in σb in the order of three magnitudes (3.16 × 10-6 to 1.73 × 10-3 S cm-1) wasfound after incorporating 0.1 mol Al3+ per formula unit into LTP.

Moreover, since the crystal structural changes are almostlinear in the LATP system up to x = 0.5, the increase of σb is most probably related to additional Li+sites at the M3 (36f)position.

The additional Li+leads to a displacement of Li+occupying the M1 (6b) sites towards the nearest-neighboring M3position, and therefore opens the fast-conducting pathway within the NASICON structure.

A significant change in σb wasalso observed as the Al3+ content further increased (x = 0.1 to 0.5).

 The highest σb value of 5.63 ×10-3 S cm-1 was obtainedfor samples with x = 0.4.Li1+xAlxTi2-x(PO4)3(LATP) with a NASICON-type structure (NaSuper-Ionic Conductor with space group 	3) is a solidelectrolyte with Li+ion conductivity of approximately 10-4 – 10-3S cm–1 , which makes it acceptable for the construction of anall-solid state Li-ion battery.

NASICON was originallydiscovered in 1976 by Hong et al.as an isostructural Na+-conducting material, namely Na1+xZr2P3-xSixO12.6,7Thereafter, Na+was replaced by Li+to obtain the Li+conducting counterpart.

However, replacing Na+with Li+inLiZr2(PO4)3led to disappointingly low total Li+conductivity(σtotal) of only ~10-9 S cm–1 at room temperature (RT).

A greatenhancement of the Li+conductivity up to 10-6 S cm-1 at RT canbe achieved by substituting Zr4+ with the smaller Ti4+.

8Theadditional partial substitution of Ti4+ by trivalent cations (e.g.,Al3+) made LATP one of the best Li+-conducting materialsamong all inorganic Li+solid electrolytes

Apart from thechemical composition and crystal chemistry, it was also shownthat sintering aids or binders (e.g., Li4P2O7, and Li2O) led to anadditional enhancement of the overall Li+conductivity inNASICON-based materials, regardless of the type and size ofthe trivalent cation used.

The Li+conductivity of solid electrolytes is usually measured byimpedance spectroscopy, which allows the separation of grainand grain boundary contributions.

However, due to the veryhigh Li+bulk conductivity (σb) of LATP (>10-3 S cm-1), thecorresponding arc in the complex impedance plane is in thehigh MHz range and can be conventionally resolved only atvery low temperatures.

Determination of the bulk conductivity is strongly simplifiedwhen large sized single crystals are available; as forpolycrystalline pellets macroscopic electrodes may be used inelectrical measurements and electrical properties can bedetermined without being restricted by the need for a properseparation of partly large grain boundary resistances.

ForLATP, however, as for many other oxides, such large singlecrystals are not available.

Here, a modification of conventionalimpedance spectroscopy comes into play: microelectrodesdeposited on large grains of a polycrystalline sample still allowimpedance measurements which are unaffected by theresistivity of grain boundaries.

This is caused by thespatially very constricted current distribution betweenneighboring microelectrodes.

However, so far this technique oflocal impedance measurements was rarely applied todetermine bulk conductivities in small single crystals.

Rather,properties of individual grain boundaries in polycrystallinematerials were determined15,17,18 or local bulk conductivitieswere analyzed in extended samples with conductivitygradients.

19In this contribution, for the first time micro-contact impedancespectroscopy (MC IS) was applied to small LTP and LATP singlecrystals to exactly determine the Li+bulk conductivity at roomtemperature.

The resulting Li+conductivity is thus independentof microstructural effects (e.g., grain sizes, grain boundaries,density/porosity).

In addition, the single crystals were carefullycharacterized by single crystal X-ray diffraction (SCXRD) andthis enables a precise analysis of the impact of Al3+substitution (e.g., crystal structure, Li+content) on transportproperties and a better understanding of the structureproperty relationship of Li+-based NASICON materials.

The applicability of microcontact impedance spectroscopy todetermine volumetric Li+bulk conductivities of LiTi2(PO4)3andLi1+xAlxTi2-x(PO4)3single crystals at room temperature wassuccessfully demonstrated.

We were able to show that densitycan be excluded as a reason for the strong increase in σb ofthree orders of magnitude (3.12 × 10-6 to 1.73 × 10-3 S cm-1)after substitution with 0.1 mol Al3+ pfu in the LTP structure,which is in contrast to one of the prevailing considerations inprevious studies.

Moreover, since changes in the crystalstructure are almost linear in the LTP-LATP system between x =0 and x = 0.5, the strong increase in σb is related to theadditional Li+at the M3position, which displaces the Li+at M1sites towards the next M3position resulting in fast-conductingions within the NASICON structure.

Finally, σb significantlyincreases as a function of the Al3+ content up to 5.63 ×10-3 Scm-1 for LATP samples with x = 0.1–0.4.