In this work, we present a comprehensive investigation of the elastic properties (the full elastic tensor, bulk, shear and Young’s moduli,and Poisson’s ratio) of 23 well-known ceramic alkali superionic conductor electrolytes (SICEs) using first principles calculations.

We find that the computed elastic moduli are in good agreement with experimental data (wherever available) and chemical bondingnature.

The anion species and structural framework have a significant influence on the elastic properties, and the relative elastic moduliof the various classes of SICEs follow the order thiophosphate < antiperovskite < phosphate < NASICON < garnet < perovskite.

Within the same framework structure, we observe that Na SICEs are softer than their Li analogs.

We discuss the implications ofthese findings in the context of fabrication, battery operation, and enabling a Li metal anode.

The data computed in this work willalso serve as a useful reference for future experiments as well as theoretical modeling of SICEs for rechargeable alkali-ion batteries.

Alkali (lithium and sodium) superionic conductors have garneredincreasing interest in recent years as potential replacement electrolytesfor alkali-ion batteries.

The electrolyte in today’s rechargeablealkali-ion batteries typically comprises a mixture of organic solvents(e.g., 1:1 ethylene carbonate and dimethyl carbonate) with an alkalisalt (e.g., Li/NaPF6) added for ionic conductivity.

Such electrolytesare flammable and have limited electrochemical windows of up to4.5 V.

Ceramic alkali superionic conductor electrolytes (SICEs), onthe other hand, are non-flammable and can potentially have widerelectrochemical windows.

An all-solid-state rechargeable alkali-ionbattery based on such a solid electrolyte would therefore represent asignificant leap in safety and energy density.

The development of novel SICEs has thus far been mostly focusedon the alkali ionic conductivity as the key design parameter, and therehave been significant successes in this aspect.

State-of-the-art sulfideSICEs such as Li10GeP2S12 (LGPS) and Li7P3S113,6,11–15 have alkaliconductivities that rival those of liquid electrolytes (∼ 10 mS/cm),16and oxide SICEs such as NASICON-type LATP (lithium aluminumtitanium phosphate), perovskite-type LLTO (lithium lanthanum titanium oxide) and garnet-type LLZO (Li7La3Zr2O12), have alkali conductivities approximately one order of magnitude lower.

However, less attention has been paid to the mechanical propertiesof SICEs, which can have a profound influence on the fabricationand performance of an all-solid-state rechargeable alkali-ion battery.

For instance, a critical challenge in all-solid-state batteries is achievingand maintaining an intimate conformal contact with the electrodes during operation.

 Typical commercial cathodes (e.g., LiCoO2, LiMn2O4and LiFePO4) and anodes (e.g., graphitic and hard carbons) exhibitchemical strains of up to 10% during electrochemical cycling.

 Thechallenge is even greater with cutting edge Si anodes, which exhibitvolume changes in excess of 300%.

The SICE must therefore be ableto deform without the formation of cracks or pores to maintain theelectrode/electrolyte interface during these volume changes, whichwould require “soft” SICEs that can acommodate large strains beforefailure.

On the other hand, another potential application of SICEs is inenabling Li metal anodes by suppressing Li dendrite formation,22 forwhich a SICE with high shear modulus and hardness would be moresuitable.

To the authors’ knowledge, there have been only a few works exploring the mechanical properties of SICEs.

Wolfenstine, Sakamotoand co-workers have reported on the Young’s modulus and fracture toughness of polycrystalline Al-stabilized cubic LLZO garnetand LLTO perovskite.

 Jackman et al.also characterized Young’smodulus and fracture toughness of LATP.

In general, all these oxides exhibit relatively high Young’s moduli (100-200 GPa) and fracture toughnesses of ∼ 1 MPa√m.

In the sulfide chemistry, Sakudaet al.

measured the Young’s modulus of Li2S − P2S5 glass electrolyte,which is tunable by its composition within the range of 18 ∼ 25 GPa.

A common limitation of these experimental studies is that only theoverall Young’s modulus, Poisson’s ratio and fracture toughness aremeasured.

In rechargeable battery applications, the stresses/strainsdeveloped during operation are often anisotropic, requiring knowledge of the full elastic tensor.

The full elastic tensor is also usefulfor understanding the development of internal stress fields during fabrication, which can often have a critical impact on final reliabilityand performance of the device.

Another potential issue is that themeasured values (which are mainly for polycrystalline samples) arehighly dependent on various factors such as moisture, porosity andmicrostructure, and the presence of secondary phases.

Somechemistries are also inherently more challenging to handle experimentally, such as the sulfides which are sensitive to moisture andair.

First principles calculations based on density functional theory(DFT) can therefore be an invaluable complement to experimentsin characterizing the intrinsic elastic properties (including the fullelastic tensor) of SICEs.

 An example is the work of Wang et al., whocalculated the elastic properties of the solid electrolyte LGPS fromfirst principles calculations.

 However, data on most SICEs are stilllacking.

In this work, we perform a comprehensive investigation of theelastic properties of 23 well-known ceramic alkali SICEs using firstprinciples calculations.

We will provide an assessment of the accuracy of three exchange-correlation functionals - the Perdew-BurkeErnzerhof (PBE),31 PBE revised for solids (PBEsol)32 generalizedgradient approximation functionals and the van der Waals (vdW) density functional with opt88 exchange (optB88-vdW)33 - in predictingelastic properties.

We report the calculated full elastic tensors andother derived elastic properties (e.g., bulk, shear and Young’s modulus, Poisson’s ratio, etc.) of these well-known SICEs, and discussobserved trends with structure and chemistry.

 We will discuss the implications of the computed elastic properties for SICE design.

Thedata compiled in this work will also serve as a useful reference forfuture experiments as well as theoretical battery models.

To conclude, we have investigated the elastic properties, includingthe full elastic tensor, bulk, shear and Young’s moduli, and Poisson’sratio of a broad spectrum of alkali superionic conductor electrolytesusing first principles calculations.

We find that the computed elasticconstants are in good agreement with experimental data whereveravailable and chemical bonding nature.

In general, we find that NaSICEs are somewhat softer than Li SICEs in the same structure, andthe anion and structure type have a significant influence on the elasticproperties.

The data provided in this work would also provide a usefulbenchmark for future experimental investigations and computationalmodelings of SICEs for rechargeable alkali-ion battery applications.

