NASICON-type Na3V2(PO4)3(NVP) is one of the most promising cathode materials for sodium-ion batteries (SIBs).

Here, we report a simple solegel method to prepare NVP@C porous microspheres networkfor high performance SIBs, which can realize NVP nanoparticles successfully embedding into acetylenecarbon (SP) and multiple walled carbon nanotubes (MCNTs) matrices.

The electrochemical characterizations demonstrate that both NVP/SP and NVP/MCNTs show excellent cell performance with high rateability and stable reversibility, especially for the NVP/MCNTs sample.

 In particular, as high as 112.8 mAh/gand 70 mAh/g of the discharge capacity for NVP/MCNTs system can be delivered at 0.2C and 10C,respectively.

 Furthermore, a good capacity retention of 90% can be maintained after 400 cycles at 1C rate.

Moreover, the enhanced electrode performance is ascribed to the contribution from both of the porousmicrospheres morphology and functional carbon matrices, which can favor the migration of both electrons and ions.

With increasing concern on the non-renewable fossil fuel consumption, clean-energy development and storage have become ahot topic for worldwide governments and scientists [1e3].

Lithiumion batteries (LIBs) are one of typical energy storage technologies,which have enormous potentials in the field of next generationelectric vehicles (EVs) and large-scale energy storage systems(EESs) [4e7].

However, it is still a great challenge for its furtherdevelopment due to the absence of lithium resource and safetyissue.

Compared with LIBs, sodium ion batteries (SIBs) have aserious of incomparable advantages, such as more abundant resources, higher economic efficiency, and better safety performance[8,9].

On the other hand, it is notable that sodium has a larger ionicradius in comparison with Li ions (Naþ is 1.02 or 0.98 Å, Liþ is 0.76or 0.69 Å), Thus, it is necessary to find more suitable cathode/anodematerial for SIBs, which may not only provide facile Na-ion transport in the structure, but also impart the cathode/anode frameworkwith structural stability against the volume change and consequentstructural distortion that commonly occur during Na extraction/insertion [10e13].

Among various cathode materials, the polyanion-type compound, Na3V2(PO4)3(NVP), are treated as one of the most promisingcathode materials for SIBs, because of its typical NASICON structure,high theoretical energy density (~400 Wh/kg), good thermal stability and open 3D framework with large interstitial channels [9].

Nevertheless, the low electronic conductivity of NVP materials,resulting from low coulombic efficiency and poor cycle performance.

In addition, the biphasic reaction mechanism, which leading to the large lattice volume change during the (de)sodiation, alsomakes the negative influence on its reversibility and cyclabilityperformance.

Actually, all of these above factors limit its furtherdevelopment on the next generation ESSs systems [14,15].

In recentyears, many efforts, including cation/anion doping and carboncoating methods, are paid on these materials for enhancing itscyclability and high-rate performance [16e20].

For instance, Yuet al.proposed that effective carbon coating on the NVP nanoparticles was confirmed to be an excellent method to improve itsrate performance [21].

 Meanwhile, Kim et al.suggested thatgraphene-supported NVP composite prepared by combining solegel and solid-reaction approach can provide a superiors cyclability, and 93% capacity retention can be obtained at 1C after 100cycles [22].

However, rare reports on embedding the NVP nanoparticles into the carbon matrix, especially the porous microspherearchitecture on their electrochemical performance.

In this work, we propose and realize the first time a powerfulnanostructure design for NVP that embeds the nanosized particlesinto different carbon matrices to form porous microspheres via asimple solegel method.

This novel structure provides multipleadvantages: (I) the porous microsphere architecture favors betternanoparticles connectivity and provide high efficiency ion transport across the electrode/electrolye interface; (II) Acetylene carbon(Super P) and multiple walled carbon nanotubes (MCNTs) are usedas carbon matrices which counteract NVP nanoparticles assuringstructural integrity and facilitating electron transfer.

Both thehybrid materials exhibit remarkable improvement in Na storageproperty, especially NVP/MCNTs shows higher rate performanceand cyclic stability.

In conclusion, we present a novel architecture porous microspheres consisting of NASICON-type NVP nanoparticles embeddedinto different carbon matrices, which were successfully synthesizedvia a simple solegel method.

Their electrochemical performancewas compared and the NVP dispersed in MCNTs matrix shows thebest electrochemical properties.

This hybrid material exhibits adischarge capacity of 116.5 mAh/g at 0.2C and 70 mAh/g at 10C.

Avery stable cycling performance even at 1C rate about 90 mAh/gwas still retained after 400 cycles.

The superior performance can beattributed to the 3D sodium intercalation/deintercalation pathwaysand electron transport.

In addition, the 3D carbon frameworkprovides the robustness for the structure during cycling, thus endows this material with excellent cycling performance.

The synthetic approach presented in this work prepares NVP nanograinsembed into carbon matrices which forms porous microsphere architecture for cathode material of sodium-ion batteries and offersthe possibility to achieve high rate capability.

It might encouragethe use of hybrid material cathode in large-scale sodium-ionrechargeable batteries.

