Progress in electrochromic lithium ion batteries (LIBs) is reviewed, highlighting advances and possible research directions.

 Methods for using the LIB electrode materials’ magnetic properties are also described, using several examples.

Li4Ti5O12 (LTO) film is discussed as an electrochromic material and insertion compound.

 The opto-electrical properties of the LTO film have been characterized by electrical measurements and UV–Vis spectra.

A prototype bi-functionalelectrochromic LIB, incorporating LTO as both electrochromic layer and anode, has also been characterized by charge–discharge measurements and UV–Vis transmittance.

The results show that the bi-functional electrochromic LIB prototypeworks well.

 Magnetic measurement has proven to be a powerful tool to evaluate the quality of electrode materials.

Weintroduce briefly the magnetism of solids in general, and then discuss the magnetic characteristics of layered oxides, spineloxides, olivine phosphate LiFePO4, and Nasicon-type Li3Fe2(PO4)3.We also discuss what kind of impurities can bedetected, which will guide us to fabricate high quality films and high performance devices.

Lithium ion batteries (LIBs) have attracted a great dealof attention in recent decades due to their promise for hybrid vehicle applications, power supplies for portable equipments, etc.

 Much effort has been expended to improve LIBperformance dimensions such as long term stability and highpower/charge capability, which are both highly dependent onthe quality of the electrode and electrolyte materials.

Theelectrode material of an LIB is usually an insertion compound, which provides pathways for shuttling lithium ions,benefitting both fast ion transport and charge balance.

Insertion electrode materials used for LIBs include layered oxides with α-NaFeO2-type structure, spinel oxides, and olivinephosphates.

Keep in mind, however, that insertion electrodematerials (which include electrochromic metal oxides), LIBs,and conducting polymers[3,4]are developed not only for energy storage applications, but also for electrochromic use.

Very recently, an exciting research report entitled “bifunctional device for self-powered electrochromic windowand self-rechargeable transparent battery applications” waspublished in Nature Communications;[5]it provides the possibility of combining electrochromism and a secondary batteryto realize the dual functions of electrochromism and energystorage on the same device.

Although that work is in an earlystage, scientists are inspired to combine electrochromism andLIBs through finding insertion electrode materials that changecolor at an applied voltage/electric field.

This kind of work islikely to become a new research hotspot in the scientific community in the near future.

The combination of electrochromism and LIBs requiresmatching electrode materials.

For example, both electrodesmust be insertion materials that can intercalate/de-intercalateand store lithium, and at least one electrode exhibits electrochromism; redox on both electrodes should be performedat the same time in order to maintain charge balance in thedevice and circuit; matching the electronic conductivity andlithium ionic conductivity of the electrode materials is anotherimportant issue.

The bi-functional devices combining electrochromismand LIBs require high quality electrode materials to maximize their opto-electrical properties and lifetime.

Magneticexperiments are powerful tools to study the fundamental properties of lithium intercalation compounds and to assess theirquality,[2] because impurities in electrode materials exert significant influence on the magnetic properties.

In addition,observing the effects of temperature and stress on the magnetic properties reveals where the properties originate and howthe electrons are configured.

 Cherneva et al.demonstratedhow the use of magnetic properties can advance the structure, composition, and electrochemical performance of LIBmaterials.

 For instance, the magnetic properties are highlysensitive to structural defects and impurities, often beyondthe sensitivity threshold of x-ray diffraction.

In this review,we introduce the mainstream of progress in researching bifunctional devices that combine electrochromism and LIB energy storage, highlighting the advances and the possible research directions.

We also describe, using several examples,how to use the LIB electrode materials’ magnetic properties.

In this paper, progress on two of the most exciting andpromising research topics in the field of LIB electrode materials electrochromism and magnetism has been reviewed.

Aswe move forward in the design of devices, electrochromic materials and LIB electrode materials must both be insertion materials.

Electrochromic LIBs must consist of five layers forthe purpose of charge balance.

The possibility of bi-functionaldevices that use LTO as the EC layer has already been demonstrated.

A prototype bi-functional electrochromic LIB basedon a liquid electrolyte has been demonstrated.

Thanks to theprogress of solid state electrolyte research, high ionic conductors can be obtained; therefore it may be expected that successful all-solid state bi-functional electrochromic LIBs willbe fabricated in the near future.

The opto-electrical properties and long term stability of bi-functional electrochromicdevices depend heavily on the quality of both electrode filmmaterials and solid state electrolytes.

Measuring changes inthe magnetic parameters of LIB electrode materials is effective in detecting impurities and structural changes in layered oxides, spinel oxides, olivine phosphates, or Nasicontype Li3Fe2(PO4)3.For these reasons, we feel confident thatwith the ongoing improvement of magnetic properties in electrode materials, the quality of films also improves, carryinghigh performance bi-functional electrochromic devices towardwidespread application.

