In this work solid polymer electrolyte (SPE) amperometric sulphur dioxide sensor isinvestigated.

Nafion was used as a membrane electrode and 1M sulphuric acid as an internalelectrolyte.

 Sensor response to sulphur dioxide was measured.

Besides traditional constantvoltage amperometry also different electrochemical techniques were used.

Results obtained bythese methods are compared.

Amperometric sensors due to high sensitivity and good dynamic properties are frequently used in toxicgas concentration monitoring [1].

 Most of such sensors are based on liquid electrolytes.

Up to nowusage of solid polymer electrolyte (SPE) membrane with layer of porous, metal electrode inconstruction of amperometric sensors is the most successful approach [2].

Main advantages of thistype of sensors are a very high active area of the working electrode (WE) and a short responsetime [3].

In this work performance of SO2 amperometric sensor with SPE is investigated.

The main goal ofthis work is to verify if usage of different electrochemical methods can improve sensor properties.

Sensor responses were measured with constant potential amperometry (CPA), pulsed amperometry(PA), cyclic voltammetry (CV) and square wave voltammetry (SWV) techniques.

These techniques are used with different sensors in the determination of different compounds.

Forexample, PA technique was used with the glucose enzyme sensor [4].

CV method is commonly usedin liquid solution electrochemistry and also with electrocatalytic gas sensors based on solid stateelectrolytes [5-9].

SWV technique can be used in the determination of volatile organic compounds[10].

In contrast with CPA, when only single value of the current is obtained, in case of the CV orSWV methods a response in a form of a curve with more information for a given gas mixture isobtained and analysed.

These additional information obtained from CV and CWV response can beused to improve sensor properties.

In order to analyse such responses a various methods of dataanalysis can be used [11].

To our knowledge, the PA and SWV techniques have not been used so farfor the measurements of SPE sensors responses.

For such sensors, a cyclic voltammetry technique isfrequently used, however only to perform preliminary investigation in order to determine workingpotential.

The CV is not employed for the determination of gas concentration and additionalinformation contained in measured responses can not be used.

In this article experimental results of the SPE sensor investigation are presented.

Sensor response tosulphur dioxide was measured.

It was proven that measurements of a gas concentration by this kind ofsensor can be realised by other techniques, than constant potential amperometry which is usually used.

Measurements with more sophisticated techniques, such as pulsed amperometry, cyclic amperometryand square wave amperometry were made and their results were presented.

Sensitivity was calculatedfrom all results.

It can be concluded that proper choice of measurement method can improve sensorsensitivity without modification of its construction.

