By investigation of the microstructure of cerium-doped NASICON materials prepared by solid state reaction, we find that variation in the cell parameters a, b and c can affect their activation energy (Ea) ofionic conductance.

 Furthermore, changes in the grain size and morphology can influence the pre-exponential factor s0.Analysis of the electrical conductivity of cerium-doped NASICON grains reveals adecrease from that for the undoped grains.

These results suggest that when dealing with Ce-dopedNASICON system, the grain size and morphology play a more important role in determining the bulkconductivity than the lattice parameters, at least within a temperature range of 225–350 °C.

Sodium ion-conducting solid electrolytes are important functional materials for a wide variety of applications ranging fromenergy generation to environmental protection [1].

One suchmaterial, NASICON, has a chemical formula of Na1þxZr2SixP3xO12(0oxo3), that results in excellent sodium conductivity when thevalue of x is within a range of 1.8–2.2.Indeed, this so-called superionic conductor can achieve a maximum sodium conductivity of0.2 S/cm with a composition of Na3Zr2Si2PO12 at 300 °C [2].

Itsionic conductivity at medium to low temperatures (o300—400 °C) [3] can also be sufficiently high to be used in fuel cells andchemical sensors [4,5].

Ever since NASICON was first prepared by Goodenough andHong in 1976 [6], its unusual structure has attracted the interest ofa number of researchers with regards to its preparation, propertiesand potential applications.

This structure is characterized by corner-sharing PO4–SiO4 tetrahedra and ZrO6 octahedra that create a3-D network of channels through which sodium ions can betransported [7].

More specifically, two ZrO6 octahedra are separated by three (Si, P)O4 tetrahedra, with which they share corneroxygen atoms and two distinct of Na sites: a Na1 site located between two octahedra on the c-axis, and a Na2 site located midwaybetween two Na1 sites along the a-axis [8].

At a certain workingtemperature, Naþ ions can isotropically achieve rapid migrationthat results in a high ionic conductivity.

Using this structure as abasis, researchers have substituted other elements for Zr, P or Si tocreate solid electrolyte materials for use with divalent and trivalent ions, such as Al3þ or Mg2þ [9].

As a result, the basic structureof NASICON has quite an important significance to the preparationof new solid electrolyte materials.

Efforts have also been directed toward improving the conductivity of NASICON by doping it with metals, such as yttrium,niobium, and ytterbium [10].

 For instance, Fuentes et al.used yttrium to attain an ionic conductivity of 1  103 S/cm at roomtemperature [11], whereas, Yadav and Bhatnagar attained a2.85  103 S/cm room-temperature conductivity with tin [12].

The addition of hafnium to create a Na1þxHf2SixP3xO12 structurewas shown by Vogel to attain a conductivity of 2.3  103 S/cm atroom temperature [13].

 Besides, Wang et al.found that a structureof Na2.5Hf1.4Ti0.6Si1.5P1.5O12 using a combination of Hf and Ti couldattain a conductivity of 0.36  101 S/cm at 300 °C and an activation energy of 25.76 kJ/mol at 200–400 °C [14].

 However, Zuxiang et al.reported that the conductivity of NASICON were gradually reduced with increasing Ce doping from 5 mol% to 50 mol%,which was considered to be the result of an inability of Ceto form a solid solution in NASICON [15].

Building on this work,this paper explores the effects of using Ce doping levels ofless than 5 mol% on the density, cell parameters, microstructureand bulk conductivity of NASICON synthesized by solid-statereaction.

This study has found that in Ce-doped NASICON materials onlya very small proportion of the total Ce is present in solid solutionwithin NASICON grains, the remaining contained within the glassyphase that exsists between grains.

Nevertheless, the addition of Cecan increase the lattice parameters of NASICON, thereby facilitating Naþ movement and reducing the activation energy.

 With excessive Ce addition, however, the lattice distortion becomes sufficiently great to allow CeO6 octahedrals to squeeze out ZrO6 octahedrals, resulting in an increase in the amount of ZrO2 phase.

The bulk conductivity of Ce-doped NASICON is reduced when thetemperature is increased from 225 to 350 °C, because whendealing with Ce-doped NASICON system, the reduction in activation energy with Ce addition is overshadowed by the much greaterinfluence at these temperatures of a pre-exponential factor relatedto the grain structure.

In order to increase the bulk conductivity,this makes it vitally important to improve and attain an appropriate microstructure of Ce-doped NASICON at the temperatures of225–350 °C.

