Glassceramic materials based on NaMgSc0.5Lu0.5(MoO4)3:Eu3+ and Na0.5Mg0.5ScLu0.5(MoO4)3:Eu3+NASICON phases of variable composition and borosilicate glass have been produced by solidstate reactions.

The materials have been characterized by Xray diffraction and differential thermal analysis, and their photoluminescence (excitation and emission) spectra have been measured.

Their spectral characteristics havebeen analyzed with the aim of identifying materials potentially attractive as red phosphors.

The current status and future prospects of lightingengineering, optoelectronics, and laser technologiesare determined to a significant degree by the development of physicochemical tools for a targeted search forand engineering of novel materials with tailored spectroscopic and luminescent properties.

In this context,an important place is occupied by systems based onrareearth compounds, which offer bright emission atroom temperature, long excited state lifetimes, andfixed band position.

In particular, europium compounds are widely used as phosphors with characteristic emission in the red spectral region [1].

A great deal of attention is currently paid to luminescent glassceramic materials, which combine thefunctional properties of crystallites embedded in aglass matrix and the technological advantages offeredby glass preparation processes [2–4].

Glassceramicmaterials have a number of advantages over conventional ceramics: fine grains, lower porosity, and thepossibility of controlling the crystallite size.

Comparedto glasses, glassceramics have considerably higherstrength, more stable parameters, and smaller thermalexpansion coefficients [5].

There is great interest in oxide phases that crystallize in NASICONrelated structures, which is arousedby their unique properties: high chemical and thermalstability and low thermal expansion [6–9].

NewNASICON phases have been sought for a long time inphosphate, molybdate, sulfate, silicate, and arsenatesystems.

Such phases are used as key components inproducing phosphors, sensors, optical devices, membranes, and catalysts.

The possibility of varying the cation compositionwithout changes in structure type allows for the targeted synthesis of M1 –хA1 –хR1 +х(MoO4)3 phases ofvariable composition (where M, A, and R are mono,di, and trivalent cations, respectively) crystallizing inNASICONrelated structures.

A necessary conditionfor a compound to have a NASICONrelated structure is that the size of the doubly and triply chargedcations in it lie in the range 0.6–0.9 Å [10, 11] (whichis met by the Mg2+, Sc3+, and Lu3+ ions) and that thesize of the additional cation Na+, which resides inframework voids, be not very large [12].

The objectives of this work were to synthesize phosphors based on borosilicate glass and Eu2О3dopedNаMgSc0.5Lu0.5(MoO4)3 and Na0.5Mg0.5ScLu0.5(MoO4)3NASICON phases of variable composition and investigate their spectroscopic and luminescent properties.

Analysis of the luminescence spectra of the glassceramics has shown that the europium oxidedopedsamples exhibit bright 616nm luminescence, arisingfrom the Eu3+ 5D0 → 7F2 transition.

The luminescencespectra of the glassceramics suggest that these materials are potentially attractive as narrowband redphosphors.

The present data for the NASICONcontainingglassceramics demonstrate that increasing the Eu2O3content to above 6 mol % reduces the thermal stabilityof the glassceramics and contributes to the formationof crystallites of NASICON phases and europiumoxide.

