As the most promising candidate of the solid electrolyte materials for future lithium batteries, oxide electrolytes with high–lithium-ion conductivity have experienced a rapid developmentin the past few decades.

Existing oxide electrolytes are dividedinto two groups, i.e., crystalline group including NASICON,perovskite, garnet, and some newly developing structures, andamorphous/glass group including Li2O–MOx (M = Si, B, P,etc.) and LiPON-related materials.

After a historical perspective on the general development of oxide electrolytes, we try togive a comprehensive review on the oxide electrolytes withhigh–lithium-ion conductivity, with special emphasis on theaspect of materials selection and design for applications assolid electrolytes in lithium batteries.

Some successful examplesand meaningful attempts on the incorporation of oxide electrolytes in lithium batteries are also presented.

In the conclusion part, an outlook for the future direction of oxideelectrolytes development is given.

B ATTERIES based on lithium as working medium, i.e.,lithium batteries, especially those using Li metal asanode, are of considerable interest because of the lightestequivalent weight (6.94 g/mol) and the highest electropositivity (3.04 V vs standard hydrogen electrode) of lithiumamong metals, which gives rise to high cell voltages andenergy densities.

Additionally, Li metal, if used as anode,i.e., in the case of lithium-metal batteries, can much moreeasily be handled at room temperature (RT) when comparedwith the other alkali metals.

Compared with liquid counterparts, solid electrolytes are nonflammable, free from problems of corrosion, leakage, and evaporation, and exhibit theintrinsic potential to prevent internal cell short circuit causedby direct contact of active electrode components and the possibility for miniaturization using thin-film-processing techniques.

Therefore, lithium batteries using solid electrolytes,i.e., all solid-state lithium batteries (ASLBs), are regarded tobe intrinsically safe with largely enhanced cycle life as compared with the commercial ones using organic liquid electrolytes, thus holding high promise to be used in large scalefor energy storage in transportation and grid balance (electrical utility load leveling).

To be used as solid electrolytes in lithium-based batteries,especially in the future wide applications for large scaleenergy storage, the materials should ideally have high–lithium-ion conductivity (e.g., >104 S/cm) at RT,1 negligibleelectronic conductivity (i.e., the Li+ ion transference numberclose to unity), wide electrochemical window (e.g., >6 V vsLi+/Li) and stability with respect to adjacent electrodes, stability against heat treatment and moisture/aqueous solution,suitable mechanical properties, ready availability of chemicalconstituents, ease of fabrication, and reasonable cost.

WhenLi metal is used as anode, the stability against Li metal isalso required.

In the first prototypical ASLB developed by Liang et al.2,3in 1969, LiI was used as electrolyte.

Shortly after, anothertype of LiI-based battery became commercially available,being successfully used in cardiac pacemaker.

However, LiIexhibited low ionic conductivity (about 107–106 S/cm at27°C),5 thus can only be suitable for low drain batteries withthin film separators so that the contribution of the LiI electrolyte to the total resistance of the battery can be minimized.

In addition, LiI is extremely hygroscopic and softensat about 100°C, limiting its wide applications.

Li3N was another lithium-ion conductor investigatedintensively over the same period of LiI, while exhibitingmuch higher conductivities (over 103 S/cm at RT for its single crystals6).

However, Li3N was shown to be unstableunder potentials higher than 0.44V7,8 or in contact withatmosphere.

 Plus, the two-dimensional (2D) conduction nature renders the conductivity of polycrystalline Li3N to beorders of magnitude lower than its single crystalline form.

LiBH4 is a newly discovered lithium-ion conductor withelectrochemical stability of up to at least 5 V (vs Li+/Li).

It also has advantages10,11 of light weight, low grain-boundary resistance, and high stability to chemical reaction with Limetal and graphite-based anodes.

However, the acceptableionic conductivity can only be achieved above 120°C, wherea transition from low temperature phase (insulator) to hightemperature phase (lithium-ion conductor) occurs.

Byincorporation of lithium halides,13 lithium amide,14 or rareearth chlorides15,16 into LiBH4, RT conductivities of 105–104 S/cm can be obtained, but the resultant materials areusually less stable than LiBH4 either thermally orelectrochemically.

 Moreover, the applications of LiBH4-based materials as electrolyte is also restricted by theirsensitivity to moisture and reactivity with oxide cathodematerials.

Solid lithium-ion electrolytes, which show promising futurefor applications in ASLBs, can be divided into three categories: polymers, sulfides, and oxides.

Polymer electrolytesoffer advantages of easy processibility and flexibility overinorganic solid electrolytes, and thus are useful for flexiblelithium batteries for powering wearable devices.

One subclassof polymer electrolytes, gel polymers, as a “quasi-solid” transitional generation of the kind, have already been utilized incommercial lithium batteries based on Bellcore technology.

22However, such gel electrolytes could bring about new problems associated with lower mechanical strength and lesschemical stability.

Sulfide electrolytes have become attractivedue mainly to the high ionic conductivity together with lowtemperature processing.

RT conductivities of 103–102 S/cmhas been reported in several sulfide systems, e.g., thioLIthium SuperIonic CONductor (thio-LISICON),23 Li2SP2S5 glass-ceramics,24,25 and Li101MP2S12 (M = Ge, Sn,Si).

The applications of sulfide electrolytes may be largely accelerated once the main problem associated withhygroscopicity is properly tackled.

Since we are not goingto talk about polymers and sulfides in details in this review,readers who are interested can reach to earlier reviewarticles.

Compared with other inorganic solid lithium-ion conducting compounds such as halides and sulfides, oxide lithiumion conductors are generally more stable against ambient airand high temperature, thus can easily be handled duringmanufacture and operation of devices.

 Moreover, oxide electrolytes are superior for their easier accessibility of raw materials.

Accordingly, looking for appropriate solid electrolytesfrom oxide lithium-ion conductors for future lithium-basedbatteries has attracted ever-increasing interests.

In thisreview, we will mainly focus on recent progress in such oxideelectrolytes, with special emphasis on the aspect of materialsselection and design for applications as solid electrolytes inlithium batteries.

Although the focus of this review is put on recent progress inpromising oxide electrolytes, it is still hard to cover allaspects, since this topic is continuing to develop rapidly.

Asdiscussed earlier, oxide electrolytes can basically be dividedinto two types: crystalline state and amorphous/glass state.

Amorphous/glass oxide electrolytes exhibit low lithium-ionconductivities, but can be incorporated in thin-film ASLBsby thin-film fabrication techniques.

 LiPON is a good example for the successfully commercial application.

For crystalline oxide electrolytes, early investigated materials withsimple structures generally exhibit low conductivities, thuscould only be used at high temperatures.

Newly developedstructures, including NASICON, perovskite, and garnet, arehighly conductive for Li+ ions, making the ASLBs becomeviable.

Although some prototypes of ASLBs based on thesenewly developed oxide electrolytes have been proposed, muchwork still remains for their real applications.

Specifically, major candidates with NASICON or perovskite-type structure contain ions such as Ti4+ that can bereduced below certain reduction potential, giving rise to electronic conductivity that may cause short circuit of the battery.

Perovskite-type oxide electrolytes also suffer from highgrain-boundary resistance which suppresses the total conductivity to a relatively low level.

Garnet-type oxide electrolytesare free from the easy reduced problems but plagued by therelative sensitivity to ambient air.

Concerning to the assembly of the whole solid state battery, the severe sintering conditions of all the above newly developed oxide electrolytesare also problematic.

Although several meaningful attemptshave been done, the performance of the batteries is still farfrom satisfaction.

In general, the development of oxide electrolytes is goingthrough the period from searching for appropriate materialsby trial and error to application-oriented materials design.

The development increasingly benefits from new advancedcharacterization techniques and calculations/simulations.

Besides experimentally investigating oxide electrolytes withcomplicated structures, calculations/simulations can also offera facile route for designing oxide electrolytes with new structures.

It is expected that high throughput calculations/simulations techniques will play a more important role inaccelerating the development of oxide electrolytes.

A good battery performance relies on elaborate design ofthe battery structure and appropriate choice of fabricationtechniques.

To this end, new emerging fabrication techniques,such as 3D printing,336 that can implement fabrication ofcomplicated structures, deserve more attention.

Besides, asimilar structure of the electrolyte to that of the electrodematerial could also contribute to better battery performancesince the “structural match” concept may lead to a bettercompatibility and reduce interfacial resistance between adjacent battery components.

Massive introduction of highlylithium-ion conductive interfaces with disordered structureprovides a new approach to enhance the conductivity ofoxide electrolytes.

Much work remains to be done to exploitthese concepts.

