The NASICON (sodium super ionic conductor) based Na3V2(PO43/Ag + graphene (NVP/Ag + G)was successfully synthesized through a sol–gel route using a silver nitrate and graphene as araw material.

The effects of the physical and electrochemical properties of the NVP/Ag + G composites have been evaluated with X-ray diffraction (XRD), scanning electron microscopy (SEM),Raman spectroscopy, and electrochemical measurements.

 The graphene and Ag significantly influenced the morphology, structure and electrochemical performance of the Na3V2(PO43 material.

Inthe electrochemical measurement, the (NVP/Ag + G) electrode showed the discharge capacity of102 mAh g−1 at 0.1 C rate, which was higher than the pristine Na3V2(PO43.At a current rate of5 C, it still exhibits the discharge capacity of 73 mAh g−1 and the capacity retention of 71.6%.

Theresults of higher electrochemical performance of the NVP/Ag+G composites are mainly attributedto the synergetic effect of the graphene and the silver particles.

Lithium ion batteries (LIBs) have been widely used formany application such as mobile electronics and electricalvehicles.

 Many efforts have been focusing on developing the new cathode material for the LIBs, in order to alternate the cobalt-based oxide materials, because the highcost and toxicity of cobalt hinder the use in large scaleapplications.

In an effort to search for alternative cathodematerials for LIBs, the lithium metal phosphate has beenregarded as good candidate because of the high capacity,electrochemical stability, low-cost, and high-safety for thecathode materials.

However, these materials still contain the lithium ions as an ion conductor.

Therefore, ifthe lithium reserves reduce, it’s hard to lower the priceof the LIBs further.

If the non-lithium containing composite could be commercialized as a cathode material,a large-format battery easily penetrates to the market.

Alternatively, the sodium ion batteries (SIBs) have beenregarded as another power source because of the abundance and low cost of sodium reverses.

 Up to now,the NASICON (sodium super ion conductor) structureswhich is composed of corner-shared MO6 (M = transitionmetal) octahedral and XO4 (x = P, Si, and etc.) tetrahedral have been considered as the promising cathodematerials for the SIBs due to the high ion mobility andstructural stability.

Among the cathode materials, theNa3V2(PO43 (NVP) has shown great potential for SIBsdue to the open framework with highest ionic mobility.

The rhombohedral NVP shows the two voltage plateaus at3.4 V and 1.6 V versus Na+/Na, related to the redox couple of V3+/V4+ and V3+/V2+, which give the theoreticalcapacity of 117 and 50 mAh g−1, respectively.

The existence of two voltage plateaus can be allowed to use bothanode and cathode in symmetric cell depending on thevoltage window used.

Lim et al.has reported two crystallographic Na sites in the NVP, of which the Na-1 siteremains totally occupied with one Na ion while Na-2 siteis active when the sodium content goes from Na3V2(PO43to NaV2(PO43.17 Recently, the carbon coated NVPs withLi metal as an anode for a hybrid-ion battery system wasreported.

And its specific capacity was about 114 mAhg−1in the voltage range of 2.5–4.6 V with voltage plateauat 3.7 V.

The only two-thirds of the Na+ (or Li+can be inserted/extracted from the NASICON frameworkbecause the extraction of the third Na+ (or Li+ ions arekinetically difficult due to the end-member of V2(PO43and the consumption of higher energies associated withthe V4+/V5+ redox couple.

In addition, because of theintrinsic low electrical conductivity of NVP, many effortshave been reported to overcome this problem.

 Conductive coating (e.g., carbon) and composite with metalparticle have been employed to improve the electrical conductivity of the NVP and thus improving the electrochemical performance.

The graphene, which is a single sheet of carbon atomspacked in a hexagonal lattice has a lot of advantages asan additive because of the outstanding electrical conductivity, ultra high surface area, good mechanical strengthand chemical stability.

Graphene has been used as theconducting support for olivine-based such as LiFePO4 orLi3V2(PO43 batteries with negligible capacity fading evenafter several hundreds of charge/discharge cycles.

TheNVP/graphene composite was also reported as cathodematerials for the SIBs.

However, no research is reportedon the cathode materials using the graphene and Ag particles for a Li/Na hybrid-ion battery.

In our previous study,the LVP with only LVP showed poor improved electrochemical performance.

So, we concluded that graphenewas agglomerated in LVP during sintering process.

Thus,we have tried to prohibit the agglomeration of graphenematerials during the sintering process by using the Agnanoparticles.

In this study, we firstly presented a facile synthesis ofNVP/Ag+G electrode as the cathode materials for hybridion battery system to improve the electrochemical performance of the pristine NVP.

The NVP/Ag+G compositeswere applied as cathode material for Li/Na hybrid-ion battery with lithium anode and lithium containing electrolyte.

The theoretical capacity of NVP was 118 mAh g−1, whichtwo Na+ ions can be reversibly extracted/inserted from theNASICON framework.

The graphene and Ag have significantly influenced their morphology and electrochemicalperformance.

The NVP/Ag+G composites led to the highspecific capacity, rate capability and cycle performancecompared with the pristine NVP.

We have successfully synthesized the pristine NVP andNVP/Ag+G composites with smaller particle size througha sol–gel route.

The graphene and Ag have significantlyinfluenced the morphology, structure and electrochemicalperformance.

The NVP/Ag + G composites was used ascathode material for a Li/Na hybrid-ion battery and delivered the high specific capacity, rate capability and cyclingstability, which is attributed to the improved electronicconductivity through the synergetic effect of the grapheneand Ag.

 The discharge capacity of the NVP/Ag+G delivered 102 mAh g−1 at 0.1 C in the potential range of 2.5–4.6 V, which is higher than that of the pristine NVP.

TheCV and EIS measurements also showed that the electricalkinetic behavior was improved, which was leading to theenhanced electrochemical performances of the NVP/Ag+G composites.

The facile route may provide the newproduction method for a large scale of the high power, safeand long cycle life cathode materials for hybrid lithiumion batteries.

The non-Li containing of NVP/Ag +G composite can be considered as a promising cathode materialsfor a Li/Na hybrid-ion battery system.

