Divalent- or trivalent-metal-oxide-doped NASICON-type LiZr2(PO4)3 (LZP) is an attractive oxide-based solid electrolyte for all-solid-state Li-ion batteries owing to its high Li-ion conductivity and stable charge–discharge cycling. Using an extensive experimental approach, the composition of CaO- and Y2O3-co-doped Li-rich NASICON-type LZP of the composition Li1+x+2yZr2􀀁x􀀁yYxCay(PO4)3 (0 & x & 0.376, 0& y & 0.376) was optimized. A number of 49 compositions were synthesized and their crystal structures, relative density of the sintered material, and Li-ion conductivity characterized. The co-doped compositions had a higher Li-ion conductivity than those doped with CaO or Y2O3 alone. Furthermore, diﬀraction studies revealed that two phases and an impurity phase existed depending on the composition. Adding CaO signiﬁcantly changed the relative density of the sintered material. Thus, to identify compositional dependencies among the Li-ion conductivity, phase stability, and relative density was complicated, and intuitively searching for the best composition was diﬃcult. As a proof-of-concept, the collected data were used to demonstrate that the Bayesian optimization (BO) signiﬁcantly improved the experimental search for the best oxide-based electrolyte composition. Multi-objective BO (MOBO), which considers more than two target performances, was also carried out. It was validated that the BO-guided experimental search determined more rapidly the best composition compared to conventional trial-and-error approaches employed in the materials industry.
With the increasing popularity of electric vehicles, batteries with improved energy density and safety are required.1,2 Liquid electrolytes are commonly used in Li-ion batteries. However, their  poses safety concerns, and replacements with nonammable solid electrolytes to fabricate all-solid-state Li-ion batteries are urgently needed for improving safety and increasing energy density.3,4 Solid electrolytes have lower ionic conductivities than liquid electrolytes; to address this, methods to prepare solid electrolyte materials with high ionic conduc-tivities are actively explored.
Recently, NASICON-type oxide-based solid electrolytes attracted considerable interest due to their high Li-ion conductivity.8,9 Li1.3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3 (LATP), prepared based on LiTi2(PO4)3 (LTP),10,11 is a well-known NASICON-type solid elec-trolyte that builds on the advantages of LTP, such as high conductivity and stability under ambient conditions.12 However, materials based on LTP suﬀer from instability associated with the contact of the Li metal at the negative electrode because of the Ti3+/Ti4+ redox reaction.13 Recently, the NASICON-type LiZr2(PO4)3 (LZP)14–16 displayed a wide potential window that can withstand up to 5.5 V during contact with the negative Li metal electrodes. LZP has four crystal phases at diﬀerent temperatures, a-, a0-, b-, and b0-phases.17–21 The a- and b-phase appear when the sintering temperature is higher and lower than 1100 􀀂C, respectively. During the cooling process, the a-phase changes to the a0-phase at 40 C (Fig. 1(a)), and the b-phase changes to the b0-phase at 300 C (Fig. 1(b)). Among these four crystal phase types with stoichiometric composition, the a-phase exhibits the highest total Li-ion conductivity of 1.63 􀀃 10􀀁6 Scm􀀁1 at room temperature.22–24 Li ions in the a-phase diﬀuse between the 36f sites (periphery of the 6b site), and between the stable site and the 18e metastable site, according to literature (Fig. 1(a)).
The replacement of the Zr4+ ions of LZP with lower valent cations, such as Ca2+ or Y3+, led to the formation of interstitial Li ions, which improved the Li-ion conductivity.26–28 Among the Ca-doped (PO4)3 solid-solutions synthesized using solid-state reactions, Li1.2Zr1.9Ca0.1(PO4)3 showed the highest total Li-ion conductivity of 4.9 􀀃 10􀀁5 Scm􀀁1 at room temperature.29 Similarly, among the LZP families, the Y-doped compositions of  (0.1 & x & 0.2) prepared by spark plasma sintering (SPS) displayed the highest total Li-ion conductivity of  at room tempera-ture.17,30 Recently, we ascribed the higher Li-ion conductivity of Li-rich NASICON-type electrolytes to a pushing-out mechanism based on ab initio molecular dynamics (AIMD), which involves the coulombic-repulsion-driven pushing of the Li ions by interstitial Li ions, triggering a cascading Li-ion push-out.31,32 However, it was also reported that the Li-ion conductivity decreases in compositions comprising larger ratios of Ca (x S 0.2 in),29,31 which is caused by the trapping of the Li ions around Ca2+ due to coulombic attraction between the two defects, the interstitial Li (Lii) and doped Ca (CaZr) ions. Similar composition-dependent ion conduction behaviour was also reported for Y-doped compounds. Therefore, several factors aﬀect the Li-ion conductivity in the Li-rich NASICON-type compounds, which suggest the existence of higher Li-ion conductivity in Ca/Y co-doped compounds of compositions.
In this study, optimizations to determine the composition with the highest Li-ion conductivity among the co-doped (PO4)3 compositions (0 & x & 0.376, 0 & y & 0.376) were carried out. A total of 49 compositions, with the Ca and Y ratios divided at equal intervals, were synthesized, and their Li-ion conductivities evaluated. In addition, as a proof-of-concept study the suitability of the Bayesian optimization (BO) approach33–37 to eﬃciently explore the optimal composition was demonstrated. BO allows more eﬃcient sampling than the conventional random sampling approach and enables the accelerated determination of the optimized composition. A faster, more robust composition optimization for Li-ion con-ducting materials will be possible in future by validating the BO approach in this study. While several studies used BO to determine optimal compositions using experimental data,37–40 these studies did not involve Li-ion conductors. In addition, we performed multi-objective Bayesian optimization (MOBO) to optimize more than one function in this study.
A total of 49 compositions of  (0 & x & 0.376, 0 & y & 0.376) were prepared using a conventional solid-state reaction.25 Li2CO3 (Kojundo Chemical Laboratory Co., Ltd.), ZrO2 (Kishida Chemicals Co., Ltd.), CaCO3 (Kishida Chemicals Co., Ltd.), Y2O3 (Kojundo Chemical Laboratory Co., Ltd.), and NH4H2PO4 (Wako Pure Chemical Industries, Ltd.) were used as starting materials. Stoichiometric amounts of the starting materials were mixed in an agate mortar and pressed into a pellet. The pellet was heated in air at 1100 C for 24 h, after preliminary treatment at 200 C and 800 C for 6 h, respectively. The obtained samples were crushed and pelletized under uniaxial pressing at 127 MPa. The pellets were sintered in air at 1200 C for 18 h, and powder XRD patterns were measured for phase identified cations of the obtained sintered samples. A signicant decrease in sample weight (>2 wt%) was noted at 1250 C, which indicated the vaporization of Li2O and P2O5 components. Since vaporization caused poor experimental reproducibility, the sintering temperature was decreased to 1200 C, where a significant sample weight reduction was not observed. The sintered pellets were polished with emery paper, and gold was sputtered on the pellets for use as electrodes. The electrical conductivity measurements at 30, 60, and 90 􀀂C were carried out using a complex AC impedance technique at frequencies ranging from 1 Hz to 1 MHz.41 The activation energy of the lithium conductivity was estimated from Arrhenius plots of measured Li-ion conductivity.
We conducted BO to search for the composition that showed the best ion conductivity properties among the experimentally evaluated samples. The conductivities at 30, 60, and 90 􀀂C and the activation energies were selected as variables, and the compositions x and y were considered as descriptors (explana-tory variables) in Li1+x+2yZr2􀀁x􀀁yYxCay(PO4)3 (0 & x & 0.376, 0 & y & 0.376) for BO. The random and the BO search were per-formed 1000 times each, and the average numbers of observa-tions required to reach the optimal solution were compared. A GP model is embedded in the present BO method, and the ex-pected improvement (EI) strategy was chosen to obtain the acquisition function.
Among the 49 sintered pellets with diﬀerent compositions ob-tained after heating at 1200 􀀂C for 18 h, the compositions of LiZr2(PO4)3 and Li1.062Y0.062Zr1.938(PO4)3 (referred to as Y0/Ca0 and Y0.062/Ca0) were not mechanically stable due to insuﬃcient densication. Thus, 47 sintered pellets are further discussed.
The relative densities, which is the ratio of the bulk density to the theoretical density of the sintered pellets at room temperature, are shown in Fig. 2(a). The relative density was less than 80% for most of the compositions with y & 0.062 in Li1+xZr2􀀁xYx(PO4)3. Fig. 2(b) shows the SEM images of the sin-tered pellets with the compositions Y0/Ca0.126,Y0.126/Ca0.126, and Y0.126/Ca0. The Ca-containing compounds Y0/Ca0.126 and Y0.126/Ca0.126 displayed unclear grain boundary images, indi-cating that the neck growth process progressed suﬃciently. The relative densities of these two compositions were about 90%. On the other hand, the grain boundary and void images were clearly visible for the sample that did not contain Ca (Y0.126/Ca0), and the relative density was only 60.4%, which indicates that Ca has a sintering-aid eﬀect.
Fig. 3 displays the results of X-ray diﬀraction (XRD) crystal structure identified cations for each pellet composition. Although all samples were sintered at the heating condition described in liter-ature for forming a-phases,25 it was observed that b-phases formed depending on the composition. For example, a-and b-phases were formed for the Y0.062/Ca0.062 and Y0.312/Ca0.188 compositions, respectively, as displayed in Fig. 3(a) and (b). The phase ratios of the prepared samples were investigated using XRD pattern anal-yses using the PDXL soware,42 as shown in Fig. 3(c). The yttrium-rich compositions with y >0.2in tended to form b-phases, whereas a-phase structures appeared in the composition regions of x > y and y <0.2.
Fig. 3(c) shows the ratio of the impurity phases that corre-sponded to neither an a- nor a b-phase and which was estimated using the reference intensity ratio (RIR) method.43 Most impu-rity phases are ascribed to YPO4 and Li3PO4 for the Y- and Ca-rich composition regions, respectively. Further, the impurity phases were mainly observed for highly doped compositions, indicating the solubility limit of Ca and/or Y ions, and the formation of these impurity phases caused a reduction of the ionic conductivity. Small amounts of impurity phases appeared even in the low-doping concentration regions, when the composition was at the border of the a-orb-phase region.
Typical complex AC impedance plots at 30 􀀂C for the composition Y0.062/Ca0.062 are shown in Fig. 4(a). A slightly distorted single semicircle curvature was observed in the higher frequency range and low-frequency spike, which was almost vertical against the real part impedance axis. The low-frequency spike corresponds to capacitanceatthe interfacebetween theelectrolyte andirreversible (gold) electrode. The capacitance for the high-frequency semicircle ranged from 10􀀁11 to 10􀀁10 F, which corresponds to the capaci-tance for bulk and/or grain boundary resistance. The distorted shape observed for all compositions in the high-frequency semi-circle might indicate the presence of both bulk and grain boundary resistances. Nevertheless, it was diﬃcult to distinguish the grain and grain boundary derived resistances due to the overlapping of the two semicircles. Therefore, for subsequent analyses, the total resistances (sum of bulk and grain boundary resistances) were evaluated by applying the least-squares method to the semicircles. Fig. 4(b) shows the Arrhenius plots of the total ionic conductivity of Y0.062/Ca0.062. The semicircles in the impedance plots and the linear function in the Arrhenius plots tted well in the entire composition range of this study. For example, R2,thecoeﬃcient of determination for the linear  in the Arrhenius plots, was less than 0.98, indicating that reasonable fitting was performed.
Fig. 4(c) summarizes the ionic conductivity of Li at 30, 60, and 90 C and the activation energies for each composition are plotted as 2-dimensional heatmaps. The composition with the highest conductivity was Li1.378Zr1.748Y0.126Ca0.126(PO4)3 (Y0.126/Ca0.126) at all temperatures. The conductivity of the composition Y0.126/Ca0.126 at 30 C was , which was 4.5 times higher than that of the composition Y0/Ca0.126 and 􀀄20 times higher than that of the composition Ca0/Y0.126, which corresponded to the highest conductivity among singly doped Ca- and Y-samples, respectively. Thus, co-doping is an attractive strategy to improve ionic conductivity performance, despite the need for exploring a vast search space. The grain-boundary resistance may decrease not only by optimizing the composition, but also by improving the sintering process, using techniques such as cold isostatic pressing (CIP) or hot isostatic pressing (HIP). The heatmap of the activation energy shows a strong correlation with the compositional trend of conductivity except for singly Y-doped compositions. Further, the activation energies for singly Y-doped compositions were relatively small despite the low Li-ion conductivity due to the poor sintering ability in the absence of Ca doping. This may be related to the reported low trapping eﬀect of Y ions in LZP compared to that of Ca ions for the formation of the a-phase. The large grain boundary-derived resistance arising from the poor sintering ability lowers the total Li-ion conductivity, while the migration energies in the bulk or the interface between the grains may be reduced by Y doping and a-phase formation.
Accordingly, the variation in the total ionic conductivity is rather complicated due to multiple factors aﬀecting ion conduction behaviour, such as phase stability, trapping eﬀect of doped ions, and sintering ability. This limits the fundamental understanding of the conductivity behaviour and makes its optimization diﬃcult.
As mentioned in the introduction section, we undertook a verication of the BO approach to demonstrate the eﬃcient opti-mization of the experimental observations in this study. The BO and random search were performed 1000 times each, and the compositions x and y were the only descriptors used in the Gaussian process (GP) regression. Here, an overview of the sample selection via BO and the EI strategy for the examination of material properties is provided. BO allows more eﬃcient sampling than the conventional random sampling approach and enables the accelerated deter-mination of the optimized composition. The accumulated data obtained from each iteration of experiments were used to train the GP models for improving the prediction of the conductivity or activation energy as a function of the descriptors, which were the compositions x and y. Thereaer, the composition to be evaluated next was determined by two factors. One is the ‘exploitation’ for selecting a composition with a high-expectation value (in this study, high conductivity or low acti-vation energy), and the other is ‘exploration’, which selects a composition with large dispersion from the GP-based prediction of unknown data. The ‘exploitation’ and ‘explora-tion’ are then leveraged based on the appropriate hyper-parameter setting when selecting the next unknown sampling points (the hyper-parameter settings are updated at each sampling step in this study). Repeating the above samplings, the BO is expected to  the best sampling point by smaller sampling points than random search. Hence, a faster compo-sition optimization for Li-ion conductivity performance will be possible by validating the BO approach in this study.
Fig. 5(a) and (b) show the variation in the average for the best properties (conductivities or activation energy) among the observed samples and the discovery probability of the opti-mized composition x and y, respectively, as a function of the number of experiments (observations).
This statistical analysis suggested that the BO could the optimal solution afterer 16 experiments with a failure rate of <0.1% since 16 BO trials always found the best composition for all 1000 BO runs. These results suggest that the BO can deter-mine the optimal solution in about one third the number of times than those required for the random search. Similarly, for ionic conductivities at 60 and 90 􀀂C and the activation energy, BO successfully and eﬃciently optimized the composition, in contrast to random searching. In addition, a sudden increase in the discovery rate was noticed after exploration schemes, indi-cating that the BO scheme can be improved by using additional descriptors that correlate to the targeted properties. In addition, the transfer learning technique is benecial when one develops related compounds, such as Na-ion conductors with NASICON-type structures, as described in our previous study.34 The initial exploration steps in the BO  contain hyper-parameter tuning for BO or GP, so that the succeeding hyper-parameter sets for the related samples may accelerate the searching eﬃciency.
MOBO was attempted next to optimize mechanical and ion conduction performances. In this optimization, the optimal point is not uniquely  because of the possible trade-oﬀ relation among multiple target properties. Instead, most of the algorithms explore the ‘Pareto frontier’ of the objective functions, which is as a set of points that cannot be improved without any other properties. We referred to the relative density for mechanical properties and ionic conductivity at 30 C, and the Pareto frontier of both properties were searched. A total of 4 compositions corresponding to the Pareto frontier were explored, as shown in Fig. 6. Neither the relative density nor the conductivity of the four red points in Fig. 6 can be improved without decreasing the other property. For the acquisition function of MOBO, we used an extension of EI44 that evaluates the expected increase of the Pareto hyper-volume, which is  as the volume of the area under the Pareto frontier, shown as the yellow shaded region in Fig. 6. The panels on the of Fig. 7 present the MOBO process as  a function of the observation numbers. We studied the progress of MOBO to the ‘simple relative hyper-volume’, which repre-sents the normalized area or volume consisting of Pareto frontiers (see details in the ref. 44). Exploring the Pareto frontier revealed that the MOBO search is more eﬃcient than the random approach, even when considering a sample space as small as 47. However, the search space is relatively small in the present MOBO, and a further eﬃciency improve-ment is expected for the system with larger numbers of candidate-composition combinations. To  such a possi-bility, the search space was extended by increasing the composition combinations from 47 to 225 samples using the Gaussian interpolation of ionic conductivity with noise modications. The panels on the right of Fig. 7 compare the averaged MOBO performance with the random search and indicate that the optimization eﬃciency was largely improved for a larger search space. Further, the increase of the sample space from 47 to 225 compositions enhanced the eﬃciency, and only 89 trials guaranteed a 100% MOBO search, while 213 trials were required for the random search. For comparison purpose, the other multi objective optimization approach based on the non-dominated sorting genetic algorithm II (NSGA-II)45 was performed and a better optimization performance for the present MOBO approach , as shown in ESI Fig. S1.† Increasing the number of dopants and/or adding processing parameters for the optimization largely expands the search space, however, it  increases the costs and R&D resources. In this context BO minimizes costs in search for the best material. Also, a 3-point MOBO search was conducted, where 3 compositions are simultaneously evaluated in each MOBO iteration. The results presented in ESI Fig. S2† indicated no  diﬀerence between single- and 3-point MOBO. This allows a experimental plan that can utilize available facilities and resources without  time and cost eﬃciency.
In this study, we comprehensively evaluated Li-ion conductivity and the bulk and grain boundary contributions of (PO4)3 (0 & x & 0.376, 0 & y & 0.376) to optimize the compositions x and y. The results revealed that the highest total ion conductivity of  at room temperature, including the bulk and grain boundary conduction, was observed for x = 0.126 and y = 0.126. Several factors may contribute to the Li-ion conductivity, such as phase stability of the a-orb-phase, impurity phase formation, and trapping eﬀect of the aliovalent Ca2+ and Y3+ doping cations with respect to the migrating Li ions. Further, we conrmed that the sintering-aid eﬀect of CaO doping might reduce grain boundary resistance. These results indicated that the compo-sitional dependence of Li-ion conductivity is rather compli-cated, which makes the conventional search for the optimal composition relying on experience and intuition highly challenging.
To reduce the number of experiments required for the comprehensive evaluation of the 47 compositions, we demon-strated the suitability of the BO approach for the optimal composition search. We compared the number of experimental observations, and for the BO process the optimal solution was determined with a failure rate < 0.1% compared to that for the random search. These results conrmed that BO predicts the optimal composition using only about one third the number of experiments, which indicated that BO with solely the compo-sitions x and y as the descriptors was able to eﬃciently predict the total conductivity. In addition, the eﬃciency of the MOBO approach for the Pareto frontier search of the present data was demonstrated. Unfortunately, the number of experimental observations (47 points) was insuﬃcient for improving the search eﬃciency. However, MOBO is more eﬀective as the search space becomes larger, such as for compounds with three dopants. In summary, the validity of BO and related techniques for composition optimization was  in this paper.