This article applies advanced machine-learning techniques to achieve effective future capacities and RUL prediction for lithium-ion (Li-ion) batteries with reliable uncertainty management. T
LITHIUM-ION(Li-ion) batteries have become the main power sources to actuate electric vehicles.
It is vital to develop the proper battery health diagnosis system (BHDS) to ensure that the batteries are operated within the reliable conditions.
These strategies can be classified into two main categories, including the specific model-based approach and data-driven approach.
Recurrent neural network (RNN) is one powerful method to extract and update the correlations of sequential data, owing to its structure by augmenting recurrent links to hidden neurons.
Zhang et al. [24] proposed a long short-term memory (LSTM) RNN-based framework to capture the long-term degradation trend.
Driven by the above purpose, this article applies the machinelearning techniques to derive a new data-driven approach, enabling accurate future capacities prediction and reliable uncertainty management for Li-ion batteries.
After using the empirical mode decomposition (EMD) technique to decompose the original capacity degradation data for different batteries, LSTM submodel is applied to fit the residual, bringing the benefits that the long-term
dependence of battery capacity degradation can be kept and updated without gradient vanishing. 
GPR submodel is used to capture the local fluctuations, where the uncertainty quantification caused by the capacity regeneration phenomena can be considered simultaneously.
Prediction performance of several data-driven models are investigated and compared in terms of kernel function and training input number. The combined LSTM+GPR model presents to outperform other counterparts.
For various applications, including 1-step, multistep, and early RUL predictions, the proposed data-driven approach is capable of offering highly accurate results with reliable uncertainty management.
Obviously, without any battery mechanism knowledge, the proposed approach can be easily extended to other battery types for health diagnosis.
In order to evaluate the abilities of our proposed method to capture long-term dependence and particularly uncertainties caused by the capacity regenerations in various operating conditions, several cyclic test datasets of NASA batteries [26] and CALCE batteries [20] with strong local fluctuations and dissimilar capacity curves are selected in this study.
Table I illustrates the operational profiles of these batteries. For NASA batteries, a test bench that consists of the programmable electronic load, power supply, temperature chamber,
and computer is used to conduct the battery cyclic aging tests.
Three cells (B05, B06, and B18) that operate under 24 ◦C ambient temperature Tamb are labeled as “Case 1” batteries. Another two cells (B54 and B55) with 4 ◦C Tamb are labeled as “Case 2” batteries. For CALCE batteries, all tests were conducted by using the Arbin BT2000 system, PC, and temperature chamber.
To solve these challenges, the proposed data-driven approach mainly uses three techniques: EMD method to decompose the original capacity dataset, LSTM submodel to capture the longterm dependence, and GPR submodel to generate the uncertainty of each prediction result.
EMD is an effective signal process technique and has been applied in many real-world fields (e.g., ocean waves, rotating machinery), owing to its strong abilities of extracting both low- and high-frequency components from highly dynamic signals [29].
To alleviate the gradient exploding and vanishing problems, a LSTM block is generally applied to embed three gates into the hidden neurons of the RNN [22].
A typical LSTM-based RNN model can be divided into three gate parts, as illustrated in Fig. 2. The states of all these gates are determined by the xk (the input at the current instant k) and hk−1 (the output at the previous instant k − 1) through a sigmoidal unit. The input gate decides whether a new state information s˜k can be received by RNN model. The forget gate is responsible for forgetting the previous state sk−1 in the hidden layer. The output gate determines, which information calculated by the RNN model can be output as hk.
A GPR model can be seen as an effective approach to undertake regression with the Gaussian processes [30]. A probability distribution of GPR can be denoted as follows: f(k) ∼ GPR(m(k), κ(k, k )) (8) where m(k) and κ(k, k ) stand for the mean function and covariance function, respectively.
For all these tests, GPRs are all trained based on the optimization of hyperparameters through using the gradient methods to maximize the log marginal likelihood.
Next, in order to highlight the effectiveness of our proposed LSTM+GPR model, the solo GPR model, solo LSTM model, solo GPR+EMD model, and solo LSTM+EMD model are compared. Specifically, the first two models. respectively, utilize the solo GPR and solo LSTM to handle the original capacity data.
According to the requirements of BHDS, predicting the future battery RUL as early as possible with a satisfactory accuracy level is more meaningful for battery real-world applications. In such a case, it is vital to predict battery RUL at an early cycle stage. In this section, in order to investigate the recursive prediction performance and the robustness of our proposed LSTM+GPR model, all batteries from NASA and CALCE are tested, respectively. The corresponding quantitative results for all RUL prediction cases are illustrated in Table V. Here, the left and right bounds of uncertainty are defined by the first and last time instant when the obtained confidence range reaches the predefined battery EOL value, respectively.
In this article, an innovative data-driven approach was proposed to enable accurate health prognosis with reliable uncertainty quantification for Li-ion batteries. This was the first known application of combining the superiorities of LSTM (recurrent links and multiple gate) and GPR (nonparametric and probabilistic) for future capacities and RUL prediction.
The long-term capacity degradation dynamics was correctly captured by the LSTM, while the uncertainties caused by capacity regenerations can be wellexpressed through using GPR, further resulting in an improved prediction results.
Future work includes effective feature extractions after collecting valuable data for the second stage trend of Li-ion batteries, and the improvement of our data-driven approach for the battery “knee point” prediction.
