 Early detection of battery-aging phenomena and the implications for the performance are crucial for maintaining warranty and avoiding safetyrelated liabilities. We established a framework for early detection of loss of Li inventory, which is further separated into Li plating and normal solid electrolyte interphase (SEI) formation.
This classification framework is based on machine learning (ML); multiple coherent and physically meaningful electrochemical signatures along the aging process are used.
The ability to manage the performance and predict the life of lithium-ion batteries (LiBs) has emerged as a necessity as electric-vehicle (EV) adoption continues to increase.
Many studies have demonstrated accuracy in predicting the remaining useful lifetime or state of health (SOH) under various usage conditions.
Generally, two strategies are used when building a predictive model: physics-based modeling and datadriven methodologies. The physics-based modeling builds upon the actual degradation mechanisms a priori, using physical or semi-empirical equations to describe diverse electrochemical (EC) processes related to changes in thermodynamics and kinetics during battery operation.
Recently, a machine learning (ML)-based algorithm that exploits numerical features was established to accurately predict lifetime and optimize charging protocols to potentially avoid Li plating.
Aging modes and mechanisms—we establish a ML framework to distinguish Li plating from normal SEI growth cases.
Therefore, an ML framework to identify Li plating will benefit research and development in this area. We used 31 graphite/NMC532 (LiNi0.5Mn0.3Co0.2O2) cells with various cell designs (anode loading and porosity) and fast charging conditions (1C–9C) to develop the classification framework without losing generalizability.
The 31 graphite/NMC532 cells used in this study were fabricated at the Cell Analysis, Modeling, and Prototyping (CAMP) Facility at Argonne National Laboratory. The
CAMP cells were chosen for this study because of full disclosure of the materials used, as well as electrode and cell-design parameters, which reduces uncertainty in identifying cell-aging modes and mechanisms.
The distinctive linearity of DQ, CE, and EOCV, as well as the shape of dV.dt 1, allows us to establish a user-based decision-making framework separating Li-plating and SEI-dominant cases in a physically meaningful way (Figure 3A).
In the following paragraphs, we compare the classification results based on human judgment against those from the ML-based classification model developed from the tree.
Further information about the AR(1) model and elastic-net regression can be found in Note S7. In the ML framework, the 31 cells in this study were separated into three distinct datasets: (1) a training dataset in which the model is constructed, including cross-validation, containing 11 cells with known Li-plating values; (2) a testing dataset for evaluation of model performance, consisting of 10 different cells with known Li-plating values; and (3) a validation set of 10 different cells for which anode images were not obtained but were inferred from both the tree diagram and the logistic elastic net.
The derived regression coeffi-cients from the logistic elastic net must be transformed by the logit link function for a direct interpretation of the Li-plating relationship to EC signatures. A discussion on the application of the logistic elastic-net model to the EC data can be found in Note S7.
PðLi PlatingÞ = 1 1 + e ð0:98int  0:05CEm + 0:35CEf 1:49EOCVm + 0:21EOCVfÞ
The first-order autoregressive component will be close to zero if the variable is changing linearly with respect to the cycle number, whereas a nonzero coefficient describes an additive behavior with respect to the cycle.
Overall, the logistic elastic-net method reaches the same result as the decision tree but only requires the first 25 cycles of data, with less ambiguity.
Looking ahead, our classification framework could be expanded to other graphitebased LiB cell designs and chemistries, because the core features of this framework are based on physics.
 For example, NCA (LiNi1 x yCoxAlyO2) cathodes are also predominantly used as cathode material in the EV community. Given the similarity in voltage profiles in NMC and NCA, this framework should hold true for cells with NCA cathodes.
We envision the primary goal of this framework to be shortening of the aging tests in the design phase of cell parameters and charge protocols, because major aging phenomena can be identified early. The development of our framework is based on well-controlled charging and discharging protocols signifi- cantly different from actual EV usage cases. Therefore, we leave the aging identification in realistic EV application scenarios to future work.
Ultimately, this early-decision framework will provide insights into cell-design parameters and use guidelines to extend cell lifetime and potentially delay the aging process.
To better reveal the cycle-by-cycle trend of the EC signatures, the data points at the spikes were removed before being analyzed by the ML algorithm.

