A Novel Machine Learning Method Based Approach for Li-Ion Battery Prognostic and Health Management
More and more attention has been drawn to the Remaining Useful Life (RUL) prediction and health status monitoring for Li-ion batteries.
This paper proposes a deep learning method that combines the Forgetting Online Sequential Extreme Learning Machine (FOS-ELM) with the Hybrid Grey Wolf Optimizer (HGWO) algorithm and attention mechanism for the Prognostic and Health Management (PHM) of Li-ion battery. First, we use the Variational Mode Decomposition (VMD) to denoise the raw data before the training. Then the key parameters optimization of the FOS-ELM model based on the HGWO algorithm is introduced. Finally, we apply the attention mechanism to further improve the accuracy of the algorithm. Compared with traditional neural network methods, the method proposed in this paper has higher efficiency and accuracy.
RUL prediction, variational mode decomposition (VMD), extreme learning machine (ELM), prognostic and health management (PHM), grey wolf optimizer (GWO), differential evolution (DE), attention mechanism. However, complex physical and chemical changes will occur within the Li-ion battery in the process of use. The chemical reaction inside the Li-ion will lead to the consumption of battery polarity, electrolyte and separator. Also the inner lifetime of the Li-ion battery will be gradually reduced due to some irreversible reactions or even failure, which will bring serious problems to the production process and even cause significant losses.
PHM is a monitoring and predicting system, which can detect equipment failure in time and predict the Remaining Useful Life (RUL) of equipment to help decision-makers to make appropriate decisions.
Li-ion battery’s Remaining Useful Life (RUL) prediction method can be divided into three categories:(1) experience-based approaches, such as the physicochemical aging model [13]; (2) model-based approaches, such as filters [14]–[21]; (3) data-driven approaches [22].
The modelbased methods and the experience-based methods are mainly to analyze the complex physical and chemical changes in the charge and discharge cycle, based on which we can build physical degradation models to predict RUL of the Li-ion battery.
Data-driven method uses machine learning algorithms to predict the battery RUL.
Researchers have proposed many different neural networks algorithms in RUL prediction of battery Li-ion, such as Recurrent Neural Network (RNN), Support Vector Machine (SVM), Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM), etc.
Gradient descent is an iterative method to solve the algorithm parameters of machine learning algorithm, which requires a long processing time. In practice, data is always being produced continuously. When dealing with this type of data, traditional neural networks algorithms are always need to retrain all the dat as a new data sample is added.
Different optimization algorithms have been proposed to reduce the inaccurate algorithm representations led by manual intervention in adjusting key parameters, such as differential evolution (DE), grey wolf optimizer (GWO), particle swarm optimization (PSO), genetic algorithm (GA), etc.
In order to solve the above problems, we choose an RUL prognosis based on data-driven approaches, and propose a new method named HA-FOSELM, which applies Forgetting Online Sequential Extreme Learning Machine (FOS-ELM) to build the algorithm, and Variational Mode Decomposition (VMD) to denoise before data training. Furthermore, the Hybrid Grey Wolf Optimizer (HGWO) algorithm is adopted to optimize the key parameters of the algorithm.
In order to make the cycle life prediction of batteries more accurate, Variational Mode Decomposition (VMD) is used to reduce the original data noise to improve the accuracy of SOH prediction.
In the part of neural networks selection, Forgetting Online Sequential Extreme Learning Machine (FOS-ELM) is used to extract features, train data, and improve the accuracy of State of Health (SOH) monitoring and Remaining Useful Life (RUL) prediction.
In the part of algorithm accuracy, analysis of the capacity attenuation of the Li-ion battery shows that each feature has different effects on the results.
The advantage of data-driven methods is that it only depends on historical data to RUL prediction and SOH monitoring of Li-ion battery and avoids constructing complex mathematical or physical models.
Grey Wolf Optimizer (GWO) algorithm is introduced to reduce the inaccuracy caused by adjusting key parameters and meanwhile overcome the premature convergence, poor stability and tendency to fall into local optimum.
Attention mechanism has been widely used in NLP tasks in recent years.
According to the attenuation trend of Li-ion battery, an HA-FOSELM prediction method based on SOH monitoring and RUL prediction is established in this paper.
Da = |C1Xa(t) − X(t)| (15) X3(t + 1) = Xδ(t) − A3Dδ (20)Equation (15)-equation (20) calculate the distance between other grey wolf individuals and α, β, δ, as well as the updated position of the grey wolves. Then, equation (21) determines the position of the prey.
In equation (22), XiL(g) is the lower bound of the individual population. XiU (g) is the upper bound of the individual population, and tmax is the largest iteration times.
To resolve this problem, the forgetting mechanism is introduced to eliminate failure samples in time. This algorithm is called the Online Sequential Extreme Learning Machine with Forgetting Mechanism (FOS-ELM). Firstly, we introduce standard Extreme Learning Machine (ELM).
In FOS-ELM algorithm, assuming that a batch of samples arrive during a unit time, u is the validity period of each sample batch. When K < u, no sample passes the valid period, then no sample fails.
This paper presents a framework for monitoring the health status of Li-ion batteries and predicting their remaining used life. The framework is shown in Figure 8.
This paper mainly compares the performance of our method with other proposed methods on SOH monitoring and RUL prediction for Li-ion battery. We use a new HA-FOSELM method to improve the accuracy of battery SOH monitoring and RUL prediction.
We apply the NASA Li-ion battery public data set and compare the results from our method with those from LSTM, SVM, RVM. The results show that our method has higher accuracy and efficiency. In practice, the proposed method is expected to help the decision-makers make appropriate decisions on usage of Li-ion batteries by providing reliable prediction. Thus, unnecessary losses and severe safety accidents related to Li-ion batteries can be avoided.

