Among them, the prediction method based on model through the establishment of dynamic model of li-ion battery  in the life cycle of operation conditions, material properties and failure mechanism of the combination, and determine  the battery performance or health status based on historical operating data and monitoring data, predict the RUL of the  current state of the battery.
At present, the main models are electrochemical model, equivalent circuit model and  empirical model [2].The paper [3] proposes a battery capacity estimation method based on equivalent circuit model,  and uses Gauss Hemet particle filter algorithm to predict battery capacity decline trend and residual life. The paper [4]  proposes a battery RUL prediction method based on equivalent circuit model and improved particle filter, which  overcomes the shortcomings of sample impoverishment and limited estimation accuracy of pure particle filter.
The model-based prediction method needs to establish a battery degradation model which takes into account  accuracy and complexity, and particle filter or its variant algorithm is usually used to predict the RUL. Due to the  initialization of particle filter and other problems, the method is affected by many factors such as environment and  load in practical application, and it is difficult to describe the RUL of battery accurately.
For complex electrochemical dynamic systems such as li-ion batteries, model-based methods are often more  complex, making data-driven prediction methods a hot topic of research [1,2,5]. This kind of method digs the hidden  battery health state information and its evolution law directly from the battery running data, so as to realize the residual  life estimation of the battery.
In the paper [6], a prediction method based on relevance vector machine is proposed, applying dynamic training and online learning to improve the prediction ability of relevance vector machine, which significantly improves the  operation efficiency and accuracy of RUL prediction process.
It can be seen from the above papers that the data used  in the data-driven prediction method includes various interferences and influences on the battery caused by the working  environment of the system, and can also reflect the monomer status and individual differences. Therefore, it can  overcome the problem of poor dynamic accuracy and poor generality of model-based methods to a certain extent.
In this paper, the nonlinear capacity degradation of ternary Li-ion batteries is studied. By data-driven prediction methods , the RUL prediction model of ternary Li-ion batteries under coupling stress based on SVR is established by  6 sets of coupling stress experimental data, and through another set of coupled stress test verifies the correctness of  the proposed model.
The main idea of SVR is to establish a hyperplane as the decision surface, which maximizes the interval between  samples to be sampled, and realizes the transformation of the classification problem into a constrained value  problem.
This paper uses the combination of grid search and cross-validation to determine the optimal parameters C and g. The basic idea of cross validation is to divide original samples into training set and test set according to the  established rule. First, the model is trained by training samples, and then the model is validated by the test sample to  evaluate the accuracy of the model.In this paper,the K-fold cross validation methods is used for its high computational  efficiency.
The accuracy of the model under each set of parameters is usually characterized by the minimum mean  square error(MMSE), and the parameters in the parameter space are optimized to find the parameter value with the  smallest mean squared error.
With the increase of the number of cycles, the battery performance parameters, such as voltage, capacity, internal  resistance, etc., have changed. For different battery types and application occasions, different performance parameters  can be selected as targets for degradation failure, and electric vehicles are often used. With energy-type power batteries,  the discharge capacity is generally selected as the main degeneration parameter, while hybrid vehicles often use  power-type power batteries, and the capacity and internal resistance can be selected as degradation parameters at the  same time. 
This article focuses on the degradation process and life model of the energy battery used in a pure electric  vehicle, and therefore selects the discharge capacity as an index of performance degradation.
The test results under temperature stress are shown in Fig.1(a). The most suitable temperature for the battery is 35℃. At different temperatures, there is a turning point at the end of the cycle. Before the turning point, the capacity  changes slowly. After the turning point, the capacity decays to the end of life at short notice.
The test results under discharge rate stress are shown in Fig.1(b). The trend of capacity decline is similar to the result of temperature stress.The greater the discharge rate, the earlier the turning point is.That is, the greater the  discharge rate, the shorter the life.Fig.1(c). show the results of coupling stress(temperature and discharge rate).The most suitable working condition for the battery is 35℃&1.5.That is,both the temperature and discharge rate affect the RUL of the battery.
After normalization, data processing is more convenient, and the convergence rate of the program is accelerated. Singular sample data is a sample that is relatively large or particularly small relative to other input samples. Singular  sample data can lead to increased network training time and results in non-convergence. Normalizing the data can  avoid this situation and accelerate the speed of network learning.
By using the best parameters C and g, the SVR is trained to get the model, which is used to predict the RUL.As  mentioned before,the result of 35℃&1.5C is prediction set data. For the data of 35℃&1.5C, some of the data(N) is  used as training set data to predict the subsequent 100 cycles(N+100). For example,the first one hundred cycles of  data are used to predict the data from 100 to 200 cycles. In this paper,the results under three conditions are shown.The beginning cycles are 100,300 and 700. For different cycle starting points, the values of parameters C and g are  different,which means the parameters of the model are different.
In this paper, the nonlinear capacity degradation of ternary Li-ion batteries is studied. By data-driven prediction  methods ,the RUL prediction model of ternary Li-ion batteries under coupling stress based on SVR is established by  6 sets of coupling stress experimental data, and through another set of coupled stress test verifies the correctness of  the proposed model.

