Accurate lithium battery diagnosis and prognosis is critical to increase penetration of   electric vehicles and grid-tied storage systems. They are both complex due to the intricate, nonlinear, and path-dependent nature of battery degradation. 
Data-driven models are anticipated to play a  significant role in the behavioral prediction of dynamical systems such as batteries. However, they are often limited by the amount of training data available. In this work, we generated the first big  data comprehensive synthetic datasets to train diagnosis and prognosis algorithms. The  proof-of-concept datasets are over three orders of magnitude larger than what is currently available  in the literature.
With benchmark datasets, results from different studies could be easily equated, and the performance of different algorithms can be compared, enhanced, and analyzed extensively.  This will expend critical capabilities of current AI algorithms, tools, and techniques to predict  scientific data.
In recent years, artificial intelligence (AI) has attracted a lot of attention for energy applications. For the diagnosis and prognosis of lithium-ion battery (LiB), one bottleneck is the training data  that is not populated enough and not representative of the projected sporadic usage [3,5]. 
This can  hinder performance as models can only be as good as the data they were trained with. Most studies  had training datasets below 20 samples. Among the studies with more, [5-12], the study by Severson et al. [5,11] stands out with 124 different conditions tested, although only charging conditions were varied. 
Even though online databases [5,13-18] are a step in the right direction, this is vastly insufficient because LiB degradation is path-dependent and small changes in conditions were shown to lead to drastic differences in durability [19]. This path dependence is an essential aspect to  consider for the validation of online diagnosis and prognosis tools [20,21]. With a limited set of  training data, the universality of the diagnosis and prognosis tool cannot be proven.
The need for high throughput computational data generation was highlighted in recent reviews , although no effort towards computational cycling training data has been reported. In this work, we will report the first synthetic benchmark training datasets that englobe the entire degradation spectrum. This will be done using computer-assisted voltage curve generation to remove the need for lengthy and costly experimental campaigns.
The datasets will be computed using the mechanistic modeling approach we pioneered, along with other groups, in the mid-2000s . The approach has been well validated [26-28] and has been intensively used in recent years  with the rise in popularity of the electrochemical voltage spectroscopies (EVS) . The use of the mechanistic approach will enable the creation of training datasets several orders of magnitude larger  than the current ones encompassing all possible degradation scenarios. This is especially important  for prognosis tools as battery capacity loss is known to accelerate at some point upon aging.
 This is  the essential feature than any good prognosis needs to capture. This acceleration usually originates  from degradations that have an “incubation” period that does not affect capacity [21]. A complete  training dataset should contain examples of paths with an acceleration induced by different  components of the degradation, whether it is the loss of lithium, losses in active materials, or resistance.
Compared to traditional battery modeling [31,32], the mechanistic framework is a backward modeling approach where the input is the degradation and the output the cell’s voltage and capacity. This makes the method perfect for generating training data and more efficient than electrochemical models because there is no need to find actual physical phenomena that could lead to a given degradation. 
The initial set up is also simpler without a need for complex parameterization and the only prerequisite being half-cell data versus a reference electrode for both electrodes. In 2017, we proposed to use this approach to perform sensibility analyses by simulating a wide range of hypothetical degradation scenarios [20]. This work is building on our previous effort to enable the creation of comprehensive training data.
In this work, we will focus on diagnosis and prognosis, two applications that require different sets of training data. To illustrate the difference between the two requirements, one can think of two time-dependent processes, one linear and one exponential, intersecting. At the intersection, the diagnostic will be the same, but the prognosis needs to be different. In addition, we will also address another hurdle for AI algorithms, the quest for meaningful learnable parameters.
Although some studies seem to fit the full constant current voltage data [33], most studies favor the use of features of interest (FOI) and only focus on a specific part of the electrochemical response. This could be capacity and resistance evolution [10,34-37], curvature [38,39], sections of the voltage response [8,40-42], electrochemical impedance spectroscopy [43,44], variance [5,11], or EVS [33,45-48]. The latter has attracted a lot of attention in recent years since the early work on the technique [22,49,50]. 
Still, the correlation of the variations with degradation is not trivial and requires significant sensibility analysis to derive universal parameters [20]. Some FOIs proposed in the literature were proven not applicable outside of the tested data [21], which illustrates the need for more extensive training sets and proper sensitivity analysis of the learnable parameters. With controlled and complete training, the theoretical framework to establish relationships between data and models can be explored in much more detail, and results from different studies could be easily equated.
The purpose of this publication is to introduce a big data methodology and showcase its possibilities. The optimization of the technique to reduce computation time and its integration with AI algorithms is out of the scope of this work.
The mechanistic approach conceptually follows the one described by Christensen and Newman to simulate cell degradation in the early 2000s [31,32]. Instead of computing-intensive electrochemical models to simulate half-cell electrode behavior, the mechanistic approach [22-25] uses experimental half-cell data for each electrode. 
Figure 1(a) presents the mechanistic representation of a cell. The matching consists of two parameters, the loading ratio LR between the capacities of both electrodes and their offset OFS that is representative of the amount of lithium lost during the solid electrolyte interphase formation. The circles in Figure 1(a) showcase how the experimental data overlap the emulated cell perfectly. To enhance the differences, the same data can be derived and plotted as incremental capacity, dQ/dV = f(V), Figure 1(b-d). 
For this EVS, each peak represents a phase transformation in one of the electrodes. A perfect match between the emulated and the experimental data proves that the emulated cell is perfectly replicating the experimental cell voltage variations. Figure 1(b-d) presents examples of the quality of the obtainable fits for cells based on different Li-ion chemistries from our previous work [51-53]. 
While the active materials are considered stable with aging, their quantity, as well as the amount of Lithium reacting, will change upon degradation. Degradation will then not affect the electrode OCV curves, but it will impact their matching. If less active material is available, the loading ratio between the electrodes will change. If some reactant is lost, the synchronicity of the electrodes will change. These matching changes can be rendered in the mechanistic approach via some scaling of the electrode curves and a translation of one electrode compared to the other, in other words changing LR and OFS in Figure 1(a).
Figure 2(a) presents the impact of the variation of LR and OFS on cell capacity. In can be seen that there is an infinity of combination of LR and OFS that can lead to any capacity loss; this is the path dependence of the degradation. This also explains why measuring capacity will never be a good enough diagnosis of true degradation. Changes in the amount of active material are referred to as loss of active material (LAM). LAM can occur at the PE and NE. Change in the amount of lithium reacting is referred to as loss of lithium inventory (LLI). The thermodynamic degradation of Li-ion batteries can be decomposed into these three main degradation modes. LLI is inducing translation and the LAMs scaling, Figure 2(b-d). More details on the technique and the associated equations can be found in [25]. 
The validity of the predicted impact of LAM and LLI on the electrochemical behavior of experimental cells was verified by independent studies [26-28]. Most notably, Kassem et al. [26] confirmed that LLI does induce electrode slippage between the NE and Schmidt et al. [54] verified that LAM does influence the LR by assembling cells with different amounts of PE versus a constant NE.
Moreover, over the past decade, numerous studies [29,30] successfully used this approach to diagnose the degradation of commercial cells. Figure 3(a,b) presents two examples of the fit of the voltage response of aged commercial cells from previous works [53,55]. Figure 3(c,d) presents the comparison of an experimental (from [53]) and a synthetic dataset constructed solely from half-cell data and simple equations that modified the matching of the electrodes based on the quantification of LLI and the LAMs. This highlights how the mechanistic approach is efficient to replicate the voltage variations associated with cell degradation.
From the mechanistic approach point of view, each thermodynamic degradation can bedescribed by a unique combination of the LLI, LAMPE, and LAMNE triplet. Conversely, scanning every possible combination of the triplet yield any potential degradation from which the voltage response can be reconstructed. This is the unique feature that is used in this work to build synthetic training datasets.
For datasets aimed at diagnosis, the approach used in previous work on an automated diagnosis tool for BMS [20] can be expanded. The [LLI, LAMPE, LAMNE] triplets can be normalized so that their sum is equal to one and they can then be represented in a ternary diagram, Figure 4. By scanning every point of this diagram (red dots) between 0 to 100% degradation for each mode (vertical lines), each possible degradation can be represented, and the associated voltage response calculated to be used in a training dataset. 
For datasets aimed at prognosis, the evolution of each degradation mode needs to be calculated independently as the ratio between the normalized values of the triplet might not be constant. 
The triplet values could be calculated, per example, for different linear degradation paces, with paces linear combined with exponential variations, or with a delayed exponential increase, more representative of the real degradation of commercial cells [19,56,57]. Since the voltages associated  with all the triplet values were already calculated for diagnosis, no additional simulations are actually necessary and the different degradation paths are all inscribed in Figure 4. 
They can be reconstructed by following the evolution of the triplet values in the ternary design space and the corresponding voltage variations can be accessed. Figure 5 presents an example of the process for two degradation paths for a Gr//LiFePO4 (LFP) cell. Figure 5(a) plots the evolution of the triplets for each path. For each cycle, as exemplified by the black box in Figure 5(a), a triplet value can be determined and the quantification can be used to find the corresponding point in the ternary design space, Figure 5(b).
Path 1 (blue) had some exponential component for LLI and LAMPE and, therefore, the path is more complicated. Nonetheless, based on the triplets and the diagnosis dataset, the capacity loss, Figure 5(c), and the voltage variations, Figure 5(d), can be deciphered. This approach for calculating a prognosis dataset will be faster than simulating each degradation path one by one as it will avoid repeating the same simulations over and over.
It must be noted that the description above was simplified for narrative purposes and was centered on the thermodynamic degradation observable at low currents and constant temperature for ease of representation. The full mechanistic approach is much more complex [25]. To be able to simulate different levels of usage, an equivalent circuit model (ECM) is included to handle different rates for each electrode [22-26]. For electrode blends, or changes in electroactive phases upon aging, each component of the electrode must be considered separately (i.e., LAMPE will be splat in LAMLCO and LAMNCA for an LCO-NCA blended electrode). 
Moreover, for datasets at higher currents or different temperatures, some kinetic parameters such as the ohmic and faradic resistance increase must also be scanned as they will influence the voltage response of the cells. Finally, in some cases, 191  lithium plating, both thermodynamic and kinetic, must be taken into consideration [25]. The validity of the mechanistic approach in all of those cases has been proven in the literature [19,58,59]. 
Kinetic limitations can be handled by modifying the simulated rate while counterbalancing the polarization changes. Simulating higher rates allows emulating slower kinetics. Simulating lower rates allows emulating faster kinetics. This allows to model different rates and temperatures [58]. Figure 6(a) presents an example from [58] where different temperatures were simulated from 25°C data at different rates. For lithium plating, the solution is to simulate the NE as a blend between Gr and metallic lithium with the metallic lithium initially outside of the potential window, Figure 6(b). If LAMGraphite becomes prominent, or if its resistance pushes its potential below 0V, the metallic lithium will then be dragged into the potential window and start interacting with the PE [19,21,25]. As discussed in the literature [5,19,25,57], thermodynamic lithium plating begins when there is enough LAMNE so that the NE is fully lithiated before the PE is delithiated. The amount of LAMNE necessary for that to happen depends n the initial cell configuration (LRini and OFSini) and also on the evolution of LLI and LAMPE [60]. Figure 6(c) plots an example of the evolution of the plating threshold (PT) for a randomly chosen
Half-cell data. Data from four different types of commercial cells were used in this work. The Gr//NCA cell was a Panasonic 3350 mAh NCR 18650B [51,58,60-62]. The Si-Gr//NMC811 was a Samsung-SDI 3350 mAh INR18650-35E [52], the Gr//LCO+NCA was an LG-Chem 2800 mAh ICR18650 C2” [53], and the Gr//LFP was an A123 2300 mAh ANR26650M [19,63]. All were extensively studied in previous work. 
 Interested readers are referred to the original publications for more details. The cells were slowly discharged to 0% SOC before being carefully disassembled in an Argon-filled glove box where the electrodes, separator, and casing will be separated [64]. Electrode discs (18 mm in diameter) were punched from the harvested electrodes and rinsed in a dimethyl carbonate (DMC) solution. The backside of two-sided electrodes was then wiped clean using cotton swabs soaked in nN-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP) solvent before being the electrode was rinsed again in a fresh DMC solution. The electrodes were tested using a lithium counter electrode. 
Metalliclithium was applied onto a stainless-steel disk. An electrolyte solution of 1.0 M LiPF6 in ethylenecarbonate (EC) + DMC (1:1 by weight) + 2% wt. vinylene carbonate (VC) was used to soak the separator, which consisted of one layer of Whatman GF-D fiberglass discs (12.7 mm in diameter, Whatman), Kent, United Kingdom). 
