In this paper, we describe how machine learning tools can be exploited to predict the properties of battery materials. In particular, we report the challenges associated with a data-driven investigation of battery systems. Using a dataset of cathode materials and various statistical models, we predicted the specific discharge capacity at 25 cycles. We discuss the present limitations of this approach and propose a paradigm shift in the materials research process that would better allow data-driven approaches to excel in aiding the discovery of battery materials.
Nevertheless, Li-ion batteries have a lot of room for improvement. For one thing, they are relatively high-cost owing to their use of transition metals such as Co, Ni, and Mn. Additionally, reliance on organic electrolytes has led to flammability and safety concerns upon dendrite growth. Another challenge is that high capacity anodes are still being developed or are not yet available. Therefore, we clearly see that each part of the battery would benefit from new materials being discovered, for example: an earth abundant cathode, a solid electrolyte, or a high capacity anode.
Currently, incremental local optimization is the primary tool for discovering new materials. However, it may be possible for data-driven methods to screen an enormous composition or micro-structural space. The principle being that machine learning (ML) models could learn from data that exists in the literature, and then very rapidly predict properties of interest for an enormous number of battery material candidates.
The use of machine learning as a tool for materials discovery is rapidly growing. Examples can be found in the fields of thermoelectrics , superhard materials, thermochemical data , electronic properties , structural materials , functional materials [16–18], and structure classification . Given the history of success of ML methods, it is natural to want to apply them to battery materials research.
Thus, there may be ample data available to exploit using statistical models. Indeed, battery researchers have recently shown an interest in employing machine learning to answer battery research questions. For example, Hu et al. used machine learning to predict the state-of-charge in batteries for electric vehicles . Liu et al. showed that machine learning could successfully be used to predict the remaining useful life for batteries systems. 
We applied ML methods to a set of data describing Li-ion-battery architecture, properties, and performance. We explored not only chemical descriptors, but also those associated with the architecture and battery testing conditions. We observed several hurdles for the successful application of ML methods to battery research, where heterogeneous materials and properties are common. We describe the challenges of applying a machine learning approach to the discovery of battery materials .
Besides learning from the metadata, additional descriptors were generated from the composition of the cathode material. These descriptors should be readily available (e.g., from databases) or easily computed without the need for computationally expensive simulations. Using the atomic properties of the constituent elements, we can construct a mathematical description, or descriptor, of the composition. That is, we consider the weighted average, and the maximum difference of a set of atomic properties for a given composition. Examples of the atomic properties include the ionic radius, electronegativity, and the number of valence electrons [30–32]. These preprocessing steps resulted in a total 215 entries and 49 descriptors. 
We used grid search and 10-fold cross-validation on the training data to obtain the hyper-parameters of our models in order to minimize the error on our test set (hyper-parameter values available in Appendix A). The random forests model allowed us to calculate a list of descriptor importances, which describes the relative importance of the descriptors used in the model.
Individuals interested in modeling and predicting battery performance care about a number of different metrics. In this work, we used specific discharge capacity at 25 cycles as an example. We selected the discharge capacity at 25 cycles because capacity fade is an important property that involves very time consuming testing, which we would rather predict via a high fidelity machine learning model. 
If obvious correlations exist, then a human can detect and exploit them using intuition. However, as can be seen in Figure 1, there is no obvious correlation. Nevertheless, machine learning algorithms are capable of building predictive models using higher-dimensional data not perceived by humans.
Lasso is a linear model, whereas KRR, SVR, and RF models allow for the learning of both linear and non-linear relationships. We attempted to map material descriptors to our target property using these models. Lasso, the only linear model, had the worst performance and is not reported here. The prediction accuracy of KRR, SVR, and RF models are shown in Figure 2. The model performance is below what is typically reported in the literature. This significant model error hinders the predictive utility for battery material discovery.
ermine which descriptors are most important for a successful prediction. Figure 3 shows the top twelve descriptors. Among the top descriptors are average dipole polarizability, average gas phase basicity, and the average heat of fusion. Electrochemical batteries rely on the insertion and removal of ions and the associated reduction–oxidation reaction. 
A successful machine learning model would cheaply and accurately predict the properties of a battery system, allowing researchers to identify materials with desirable properties without the need for costly experiments or simulations. The model performance shown in Figure 2 is not ideal, allowing for large prediction uncertainty. Although our model could conceivably distinguish between very small and large specific discharge capacities, the present predictive model would likely benefit from improvements in its performance prior to being used as a tool for materials discovery.
This lackluster model performance likely arises from several issues. An algorithm may not be capable of capturing underlying relationships, as is the case for Lasso. Lasso is a linear model not capable of capturing nonlinear relationships in the data. In addition, the descriptors might be insufficient to adequately describe a battery system. 
For example, consider the materials that constitute the battery components: anode, cathode, and electrolyte. We note that these are rarely single-phase materials. Instead, a cathode is typically made up of the active material mixed together with conductive additives as well as a binder. The ratio of these phases is not dictated by an agreed upon standard but is determined on a case-by-case basis. 
Similarly, it is well known that grain size and grain morphology strongly influence properties such as electrical and ionic conductivity. 
Likewise, the electrolyte in this dataset is very often the organic LiPF6. This electrolyte can vary widely with different concentrations of additives, such as ethylene-carbonate, dimethyl carbonate, diethyl carbonate, and propylene carbonate. When it comes to assembling cells, even while testing similar cathode materials, researchers do not use a standard test cell architecture. In some cases, the counter electrode could be lithium, in others graphite, and so forth.
In addition, we must consider the complexity which simply arises from non-standardized testing. For example, cells can be tested at different discharge rates, which can vary over several orders of magnitude. This selection of discharge rate has a significant effect on cell performance. Consider the work of Wang et al. who demonstrated an increase in specific capacity of more than 100% when changing the discharge rate by an order of magnitude.
The large amount of research being generated in battery materials provides an opportunity for potentially advancing this area of research using data-driven tools, which will aid battery modeling and the discovery of battery materials. This report highlights the challenges faced in generating high fidelity models, and suggests a framework that will guide the battery community when performing and reporting future experiments. Overcoming these challenges will benefit a data-driven approach to battery research and serve the entire community. This calls for efforts to thwart the lack of standardization which obfuscates experimental results and thus scientific advancement.